Liquid-crystal display (LCD) of achromatic, mean-modulated flicker in

clinical assessment and experimental studies of visual systems

Luke E Hallum [1,3 ]

Shaun L Cloherty [2 ]

1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand

2 School of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia

3 Corresponding author: l.hallum@auckland.ac.nz

Number of words (excl. References): approx. 8300

Number of figures: 9

Number of supplementary figures: 1

Number of tables: 1

Acknowledgements: We thank Nic Price for comments on the draft manuscript, Steven Dakin for

the loan of his Konica Minolta LS-110, and Emanuele Romanò for technical support. This work

was partly supported by the University of Auckland Faculty of Engineering Research

Development Fund.

No conflict of interest. No financial interests.

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

Abstract

Achromatic, mean-modulated flicker -- wherein luminance increments and decrements of equal

magnitude are applied, over time, to a test field -- is commonly used in both clinical assessment

of vision and experimental studies of visual systems. However, presenting flicker on

computer-controlled displays is problematic; displays typically introduce luminance artifacts at

high flicker frequency or contrast, potentially interfering with the validity of findings. Here, we

present a battery of tests used to weigh the relative merits of two displays for presenting

achromatic, mean-modulated flicker. These tests revealed marked differences between a new

high-performance liquid-crystal display (LCD; EIZO ColorEdge CG247X) and a new

consumer-grade LCD (Dell U2415b), despite displays’ vendor-supplied specifications being

almost identical. We measured displayed luminance using a spot meter and a linearized

photodiode. We derived several measures, including spatial uniformity, the effect of viewing

angle, response times, Fourier amplitude spectra, and cycle-averaged luminance. We

presented paired luminance pulses to quantify the displays’ nonlinear dynamics. The CG247X

showed relatively good spatial uniformity (e.g., at moderate luminance, standard deviation 2.8%

versus U2415b’s 5.3%). Fourier transformation of nominally static test patches revealed spectra

free of artifacts, with the exception of a frame response. The CG247X’s rise and fall times

depended on both the luminance from which, and to which, it responded, as is to be generally

expected from LCDs. Despite this nonlinear behaviour, we were able to define a contrast and

frequency range wherein the CG247X appeared largely artifact-free; the relationship between

nominal luminance and displayed luminance was accurately modelled using a causal, linear

time-invariant system. This range included contrasts up to 80%, and flicker frequencies up to 30

p. 2

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

Hz. This battery of tests should prove useful to others conducting clinical assessment of vision

and experimental studies of visual systems.

p. 3

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

Introduction

Many clinical assessments and experimental studies of visual systems use flickering stimuli,

specifically, achromatic, mean-modulated flicker wherein luminance increments and decrements

of equal magnitude are applied, over time, to a test field, maintaining the field’s time-averaged

luminance. For example, loss of visual function associated with glaucoma -- a condition

affecting 3.5% of 40 to 80 year-olds [1] wherein loss of retinal nerve fibres leads to loss of vision

-- can be revealed by measuring a patient’s behavioural responses to achromatic,

mean-modulated flicker (so-called flicker-defined-form perimetry) [2, 3]. Examples of

experimental studies involving human participants include the use of flicker to quantify temporal

visual sensitivity [4], to selectively probe putative magno- and parvocellular visual pathways [5,

6], as well as to measure steady-state visual evoked potentials (reviewed by Norcia and

colleagues [7]) and to determine retinotopic maps in cortex [8, 9].

Traditionally, vision researchers and clinicians have presented achromatic, mean-modulated

flicker (as well as other dynamic visual stimuli) on computer-controlled cathode-ray tube (CRT)

displays. These displays, although far from perfect, can be used to render a wide variety of

dynamic stimuli. The behaviour of CRT displays has been discussed in detail in the clinical and

experimental vision literature [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17] and, as a result, CRTs are usually

employed in the clinic or laboratory in such a way that their imperfections do not interfere with

the validity of findings. But CRT displays are now difficult to source, largely because of their

recent, widespread replacement by liquid crystal displays (LCDs) in consumer-grade settings,

forcing vision researchers and clinicians, in turn, to replace aged CRT displays with LCDs.

LCDs are not without their own idiosyncratic behaviours as regards rendering dynamic stimuli.

p. 4

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

However, comparatively little has been written about LCDs with the requirements of vision

researchers and clinicians in mind. In the Discussion, we will review studies that have done so,

comparing those results to our own.

The mechanism governing the display of light by LCDs is markedly different from that of CRT

displays. In CRT displays, frames are rendered by an electron beam raster-scanned over a

screen containing light-emitting phosphor [18]. The increase and decrease of luminescence of

activated phosphor (i.e., the phosphor response) is fast (typically on the order of 1 ms; e.g., see

[28]) relative to the rate of scanning (typically between 60 and 120 frames per second). On a

given frame, the luminosity of a given point is controlled by modulating the beam current. From

the point of view of the vision researcher or clinician, this mechanism confers many desirable

behaviours to the CRT display, including temporal independence of luminosity from one frame

to the next, even when rendering high-frequency flicker; because the phosphor response is fast,

the luminosity at a point in one frame has little effect on the luminance at that point on the

subsequent frame. However, a consequence of this mechanism is that all stimuli rendered by

CRTs are contaminated with spatially structured, high-contrast flicker at the display’s frame rate.

CRT flicker is imperceptible under most viewing conditions because it exceeds the critical

flicker-fusion frequency [4, 19, 20], however, it activates the early visual pathway in humans,

non-human primates, and cats [21, 22], and, presumably, other experimental animal models.

LCDs comprise a spatial array of pixels, each pixel comprising a pair of electrodes, and

polarizing filters that sandwich a column of liquid crystal (LC) material [23] (for a concise

description of the LCD mechanism aimed at vision researchers and clinicians see Elze & Tanner

[24]). The orientation of aligned LC molecules comprising the column determines the amount of

p. 5

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

light transmitted by the backlight unit to the observer; voltage applied between the electrode pair

in turn applies torque to molecules, which in turn alters the molecules’ orientation. A key

observation is that these changes in orientation are sluggish relative to changes in voltage.

Furthermore, changes in orientation are asymmetric: changes involving an increase in torque on

molecules have different temporal dynamics to those involving a torque decrease [25]. These

asymmetric dynamics are further complicated by digital response time compensation

mechanisms, a feature of most modern LCDs designed to enhance video by accelerating step

transitions between certain luminance levels [25, 26, 27, 24]. These LCD mechanisms confer

many desirable behaviours to displays, including the independence of neighbouring pixels [28,

29]. However, it follows from these mechanisms that, in general, LCDs cannot be used to

present achromatic, mean-modulated flicker because, when response time depends on both

source and destination luminance, time-averaged luminance depends on flicker frequency and

contrast.

Here we present a battery of tests used to weigh the relative merits of two displays. We are

specifically interested in the presentation of achromatic, mean-modulated flicker, as exemplified

by the studies cited above [2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]. We used these tests to reveal differences between

a new high-performance LCD (EIZO ColorEdge CG247X) and a consumer-grade LCD (Dell

U2415b); these differences were marked, despite the displays’ vendor-supplied specifications

being almost identical. The CG247X’s rise and fall times depended on both the luminance from

which it responded as well as the luminance to which it responded, and, overall, were slow by

comparison to the consumer-grade LCD. However, despite this nonlinear and sluggish

behaviour, our tests revealed a contrast and frequency range wherein the CG247X’s display of

p. 6

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

mean-modulated flicker was without artifacts, that is, the relationship between nominal and

displayed luminance was linear.


p. 7

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

Methods

_Displays and Visual stimuli._ We measured luminance on two LCDs: EIZO ColorEdge CG247X,

and Dell U2415b. The former is a high-performance display; the latter is a consumer-grade

display. Both displays were purchased in 2018, have received limited use, and have almost

identical vendor-issued specifications: panel type (in-plane switching), size (61.1 cm), native

resolution (1920-by-1200 pixels at 60 Hz), pixel pitch (0.270-by-0.270 mm), viewing angle (178

deg horizontal and vertical), response time (gray-to-gray between 8 and 10 ms), and

light-emitting diode (LED) backlighting. We used the displays’ factory default settings with one

exception: the “brightness” of the U2415b was reduced to 35% to make the maximum displayed

luminance of the two devices approximately equal (120 cd/m [2 ] ). For both displays, we used

spatial resolution of 1920-by-1200 pixels and temporal resolution of 60 Hz. Luminance was

rendered on displays using Psychtoolbox [30, 31, 32] (version 3.0.16) and MATLAB (version

[9.5.0.944444, R2018b); Mathworks, Natick, Massachusetts, USA). We used a standard desktop](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natick,_Massachusetts)

computer running Linux (Ubuntu version 18.04) installed with an NVIDIA graphics card

[(QUADRO P620; Santa Clara, California, United States ). We always allowed displays at least](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santa_Clara,_California)

one hour to warm up prior to testing. Our preliminary measurements revealed no warm-up

transient on either display; we found negligible difference between displayed luminance of a

static test patch at one minute versus thirty minutes after power-on.

_Display linearization._ Displays were linearized in the standard fashion. We presented static test

patches (384-by-384 pixels) at position 5 (Figure 2, inset) on a black background (luminance =

0%). Using a spot meter (LS-110; Konica Minolta, Tokyo, Japan) we measured displayed

p. 8

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

luminance at 11 nominal luminances (spanning the range from black to white): 0, 10, 20 …

100%. We then fit a model of displayed luminance:

_f_ ( _x_ ) = _ax_ _[b]_

(Eq. 1)

where  is the nominal luminance, and  and  are free parameters. We verified the fitted _x_ _a_ _b_

model, presenting luminances _f_ [−1] (0), _f_ [−1] (10), _f_ [−1] (20) … _f_ [−1] (100%) and ensuring the displayed

luminances formed a zero-intercept straight line (e.g., see Figure 1).

**Figure 1 caption** : Example of display linearization. Open (closed) symbols show the

U2415b’s response before (after) linearization. Red symbols show model residuals.

_Photodiode device and Electrical recordings._ We used a device comprising a PN photodiode

[(BPW21R; Vishay Intertechnology, Malvern, Pennsylvania, United States ) designed for](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malvern,_PA)

applications requiring high-precision and linearity, and a custom electronic circuit (Figure S1A).

The full-width at half-sensitivity of this photodiode is 105 deg, which, at a distance of 1 cm from

the display, encompasses 96.3 pixels. We verified the linearity of the device by measuring the

luminance of 11 static test patches (luminances = 0, 10, 20 … 100%; see _Display linearization_ )

with both the photodiode device and the LS-110 spot meter (Figure S1B). We also tested the

photodiode device using an LED at a fixed distance of 1 cm. We used a function generator

(InfiniiVision DSO-X 2002A, firmware version: 02.50.2019022736; Keysight Technologies,

Colorado Springs, CO, USA) to apply square voltage waveforms (50% duty cycle) to the LED at

frequencies from 1 to 32 Hz (at one-octave increments). At these frequencies, the photodiode

p. 9

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

device’s response to the LED was square with no measurable change in response amplitude

with frequency. We also applied a wider range of frequencies from 1 Hz to 1 MHz (at

half-decade increments). The photodiode device’s response was attenuated at frequencies

greater than 100 kHz (Figure S1C). Photodiode device output was visualized online using our

digital oscilloscope. We also used the oscilloscope to acquire electrical recordings, and to derive

response times, cycle-averaged luminance, and r.m.s. luminance. This oscilloscope enables

high sampling rates (up to 2 GHz); we used different sampling rates in different experiments

ranging from 10 kHz to 100 kHz.

_Spatial and temporal uniformity._ To quantify the spatial and temporal uniformity of the displays,

we presented static test patches (384-by-384 pixels) at nine positions (Figure 2, inset). At each

position, we presented low-, medium-, and high-luminance patches (luminance = 0, 50, and

100%, respectively), measuring luminance with the LS-110 spot meter which we held by hand

fronto-parallel to the patch. Furthermore, at position 5, we presented static test patches at 11

different luminances (0, 10, 20 … 100%), measuring 10 one-second recordings of luminance

with the photodiode device. The photodiode was positioned 1 cm from the display,

fronto-parallel, using a laser-cut acrylic arm mounted on the display housing. We computed the

Fourier transforms of these photodiode device recordings using MATLAB (version 9.3.0.713579,

R2017b).

_Effect of viewing angle._ To estimate the effect of viewing angle on luminance, we presented

large (1920-by-1200 pixels), static test patches, measuring luminance near the center of the

display with the spot meter. In these experiments, the spot meter was mounted on a tripod at 1

m. We placed the display on a turntable; to vary the angle of incidence of the spot meter’s

p. 10

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

optical axis with the display, we rotated the turntable. Thus, we measured effective luminance

for azimuth = -60, -40, -20, -10, 0, 10, 20, 40, 60 deg (negative angles are clockwise rotations of

the turntable when seen from above). Additionally, we swiveled the display from “landscape” to

“portrait” configuration, and repeated our measurements, thus varying elevation from -60 to 60

deg. Rotating the turntable (as opposed to rotating the spot meter) enabled precise control over

a wide range of azimuth and elevation. However, this approach assumes that the display is

spatially uniform, i.e., that spatial variability is negligibly small with respect to the effect of

viewing angle. We modeled luminance as a function of azimuth, _l_ (θ), using a circular von Mises

function, i.e.,

_l_ (θ) = 2πα _e_ [κ] _I_ _[cos]_ (κ) 0 [(θ)]

(Eq. 2)

where _I_ 0 () is a modified Bessel function of the first kind, order zero. We optimized the free

parameters,  and, by minimizing the sum of the squared error between the model and data. α κ

We modeled luminance as a function of elevation in the same fashion.

_Response times._ We measured response times, that is, the time taken to transition between

luminances L1 and L2. L1 and L2 took values 0, 25, 50, 75, or 100%. Stimuli were square

patches (384-by-384 pixels) at position 5 (Figure 2, inset). Stimuli were sequenced as follows:

black (luminance = 0%) preceded stimulus L1; L1 was presented for 10 frames (166.67 ms); L2

was presented for 10 frames immediately following L1; black followed L2. We used the standard

definition of rise (fall) time between luminance L1 and L2 as the duration of the transition from

p. 11

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

10 to 90% (90 to 10%). For example, the rise time between luminance 10% and 50% was

defined as the time taken to transition from 14% to 46%.

_Achromatic, mean-modulated flicker._ We presented square-wave, achromatic mean-modulated

flicker at position 5 (Figure 2, inset). The time-averaged mean luminance of flicker was

nominally 50%. We computed contrast (the temporal analogue of Michelson contrast) of the

nominal waveform using the equation:

_C_ = 100( _L_ _max_ [−] _[L]_ _min_ )/( _L_ _max_ [+] _[ L]_ _min_ ),

(Eq. 3)

where L max is maximum luminance and L min is minimum luminance. We used five flicker

contrasts ranging from 20 to 100%, and flicker frequencies ranging from 0.94 Hz (flicker period

= 64 frames) to 30 Hz (flicker period = 2 frames).

_Paired biphasic luminance pulses._ We presented single, biphasic luminance pulses

(positive/negative; see Figure 8A) at position 5 (Figure 2, inset). The mean luminance of these

pulses was 50%, and their peak-to-peak amplitude was 50%. The duration of each phase was 1

frame period (16.67 ms); the duration of each pulse was 2 frames. The first of these pulses was

delayed by a fixed period relative to a stable trigger, T t . The second through fifth of these pulses

were identical to the first pulse, but delayed by 1 through 4 frames relative to the first pulse,

respectively. We also presented paired, biphasic pulses. The first pulse of all pairs was delayed

by T t . We parametrically varied the offset between pulses comprising the pair, T = 0, 1, 2, 3, and

4 times the frame period. We used single-pulse responses to predict each paired-pulse

p. 12

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

response. To model the display’s nonlinearities, we subtracted the displayed luminance

response to a paired-pulse stimulus from the prediction.

_Model of displayed luminance._ We modeled the function transferring nominal luminance to

displayed luminance as a causal, exponential decay, i.e.,

_x_ ( _t_ ) = _s_ ( _t_ )                     - _[k]_ ( _t_ )

(Eq. 4)

where _x_ () denotes the display luminance, _s_ () denotes the nominal luminance, a square wave

with 50% duty-cycle, _k_ () denotes the display transfer function, and the asterisk denotes

convolution. We modelled the display transfer function, _k_ (), as

_k_ ( _t_ ) = _e_ [−] _[t]_ [/τ], _t_ ≥ 0

and

_k_ ( _t_ ) = 0 < 0, _t_

(Eq. 5)

Wang & Nikolić [28] used a similar model albeit for a different purpose (namely, to estimate

response times). Using our model response, _x_ (), we derived the cycle-averaged luminance and

root-mean-squared luminance for different amplitudes and frequencies of _s_ () . We optimized the

free parameter,, to minimize the sum of the squared error between the model-derived τ

measures and those derived from photodiode recordings (see _Photodiode device and Electrical_

_recordings_ ).

p. 13

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

Results

Spatial uniformity of displayed luminance can vary widely between different makes and models

of LCD, the major determinant of uniformity being the backlight scheme [33] (some older LCDs

allowed VGA input and relied on built-in analog-to-digital conversion, also a potential source of

noise). Two commonplace schemes are, first, direct backlighting, wherein a spatial array of

light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and a diffuser screen sit behind the liquid crystal panel, and,

second, edge illumination, wherein light emitted by a linear array of diodes at one of the

display’s edges is spatially distributed via lightguide. We quantified the spatial uniformity of the

CG247X by presenting low-, medium-, and high-luminance static test patches at nine display

positions (Figure 2, inset) and using the LS-110 spot meter to measure the luminance of each

patch. At each luminance tested, we calculated the grand average over all display positions,

and divisively normalized measurements by that average. As illustrated in Figure 2, at medium
and high-luminance, the CG247X showed greater spatial uniformity than our consumer-grade

LCD (Dell U2415b): for the CG247X, spatial variation was 5.1% at medium and 3.5% at high

luminance, whereas for the U2415b, variation was 8.1% at medium and 8.5% at high

luminance. The uniformity of the two displays was comparable at low luminance (CG247X, 27%

versus U2415b, 17%). Prior to normalization, there were, as expected, marked differences

between low-, medium-, and high-luminance measurements. For example, at display position 5

(Figure 2, inset) on the CG247X, low-luminance measurements ranged from 0.07 to 0.10 cd/m [2 ],

medium-luminance measurements ranged from 57.70 to 57.93 cd/m [2 ], and high-luminance

measurements ranged from 113.9 to 114.2 cd/m [2 ] (Table 1). We also quantified spatial surround

effects; using a tripod at 1 m, we measured displayed luminance at position 5 comparing large

(1920-by-1200 pixels) and small (384-by-384 pixels) 100%-luminance patches. For CG247X,

p. 14

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

the mean of 10 large-patch measurements was 0.56 cd/m [2 ] greater than that of 10 small-patch

measurements (two-sample t-test, p < 0.01), i.e., an increase of 0.50%. For the U2415b, the

increase was 0.71 cd/m [2 ], i.e., 0.67% (two-sample t-test, p < 0.01).

**Figure 2 caption** : Spatial uniformity of static test patches. We presented low-, medium-,

and high-luminance (0, 50, 100% luminance, respectively) static test patches at nine

display positions (inset), measuring luminance with the LS-110 spot meter. At each

luminance tested, we calculated the grand average, and divisively normalized

measurements by that average. Each symbol shows the geometric average of six

normalized measurements, and error bars, where not obscured by plot symbols, show

the standard error of the geometric mean. At medium- and high-luminance (grey, white

symbols, respectively), the CG247X ( **A** ) showed greater spatial uniformity than the

U2415b ( **B** ). Uniformity was comparable at low luminance (black symbols). The dashed

square indicates the size of a test patch.

**Table 1** . Spatial uniformity of static test patches at low-, medium-, and high-luminance.

Unit of measurement is cd/m [2 ] .

[Table 1 here]

In-plane switching (IPS) LCDs, like our CG247X and U2415b, enable larger viewing angles than

older LCD technology (e.g., twisted-nematic displays) [23]. To do so, IPS displays interdigitate

electrodes (see _Introduction_ ) on a single substrate interposed between the backlight and the LC

material [23]. For the displays we tested, vendor-issued specifications state a viewing angle of

178 deg, however, in the absence of further details, that derived measure is difficult to

p. 15

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

assimilate. We measured displayed luminance as a function of viewing angle over a range of

azimuth and elevation (±60 deg). We fit a circular von Mises function ( _Methods_ ) to

measurements, determining the viewing angle that reduced effective luminance to 90% (the

full-width at 90%-maximum, FW90M). As illustrated in Figure 3, the CG247X and U2415b

performed comparably in this regard. For the CG247X, the FW90M was 28.6 deg (fitted

parameters:  = 1.45,  = 3.37) and 32.6 deg (  = 1.65,  = 2.62) for azimuth and elevation, α κ α κ

respectively. For the U2415b, the FW90M was 31.2 deg (  = 1.60,  = 2.85) and 31.0 deg (  = α κ α

1.55,  = 2.90) for azimuth and elevation, respectively. At high-luminance we made a reduced κ

set of measurements, assuming rotational symmetry, varying azimuth or elevation from 0 to 60

deg. These additional measurements yielded similar FW90M estimates. This descriptive model

can be used to select a viewing distance with tolerable attenuation due to viewing angle. For

example, if the CG247X is viewed from 1 m, a stimulus presented at the top of the display’s

vertical meridian (i.e., elevation = 9.2 deg) would, due to viewing angle, undergo luminance

attenuation by a factor of 0.97.

**Figure 3 caption** : Polar plots, showing effective luminance as a function of viewing

angle. We presented a large, static test patch, measuring luminance with the LS-110

spot meter near the display’s center. We used a turntable to rotate the display

( _Methods_ ), measuring the effective luminance as a function of azimuth and elevation.

Each symbol shows the average of six measurements, normalized to peak. Error bars,

showing the full range of measurements, were in all cases obscured by plot symbols.

Solid curves show fitted circular von Mises functions ( _Methods_ ) used to estimate

full-width at 90%-maximum.

p. 16

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

A common misconception among vision researchers and clinicians is that LCDs do not flicker

(i.e., that LCDs are temporally uniform). In fact, there are two major sources of flicker that can

affect a LCD: first, backlight flicker which usually occurs at temporal frequencies (e.g., 1000 Hz)

well beyond the critical flicker fusion frequency (e.g., Elze & Tanner [24], and Ghodrati, Morris, &

Price [34]), and, second, the so-called frame response which occurs at the refresh rate of the

display (here, 60 Hz) [35, 23]. Frame responses are largely attributable to an LCD’s inversion

scheme: a feature of modern displays wherein the polarity of the video signal voltage applied to

the liquid crystal material is inverted from one video frame to the next. This inversion minimises

long-term degradation, or aging, of the display by minimizing the DC voltage across the liquid

crystal elements. Frame inversion schemes typically have fine spatial structure, on the scale of

individual pixels, making them mostly imperceptible (e.g., dot inversion schemes [35]). We

quantified the temporal uniformity of the CG247X by presenting (nominally) static test patches at

display position 5 (Figure 2, inset) and using the linearized photodiode device to measure

displayed luminance over time. At each of 11 luminances (0, 10, 20 … 100%) we made 10

one-second recordings, averaging the Fourier amplitude spectra of those 10 recordings. Figure

4 shows the average spectrum at each luminance. The spectra of the CG247X revealed a frame

response comprising a 60 Hz component as well as harmonic components at integer multiples

of 60 Hz. The response at 60 Hz varied non-monotonically in amplitude with the luminance of

the static test patch, peaking at a luminance of 50%. However, the CG247X appeared free of

backlight modulations. This absence of modulations free us of the consequences of said

modulations (often desynchronized with the frame refresh signal) on increment/decrement

transitions between luminances (see Fig. 5 in [24]). The spectra of our consumer-grade LCD

also revealed a frame response, as well as 1.2 kHz flicker, likely associated with the back light.

This latter temporal nonuniformity increased linearly with the luminance of the static test patch.

p. 17

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

For each display, we verified that the frame response was optical and not related to any radiated

electromagnetic noise: We used the oscilloscope to visualize the Fourier amplitude spectrum

online. We then interposed opaque cardboard between the photodiode and display which

caused the disappearance of the frame response. For the U2415b, we similarly verified that the

1.2 kHz response was optical.

**Figure 4 caption** : Temporal uniformity of nominally static test patches. We presented

nominally static test patches at display position 5 (Figure 2, inset), measuring luminance

with a linearized photodiode device. At each luminance (0, 10, 20 … 100%) we made

ten 1-second recordings, deriving the Fourier amplitude spectrum for each. Each

spectrum illustrated is the average of 10 spectra. For each display, we normalized

spectra such that 1000 corresponds to the DC component at 50% luminance; therefore,

a value of 5.0 corresponds to approximately 0.15 cd/m [2 ] . The spectra of the CG247X

(upper) revealed a frame response, comprising a 60 Hz component and harmonic

components at integer multiples of 60 Hz. This frame response varied non-monotonically

in amplitude with the luminance of the static test patch, peaking between 40 and 50%

luminance. The spectra of the U2415b (lower) also revealed a frame response, as well

as 1.2 kHz flicker, the amplitude of which increased linearly with the luminance of the

static test patch (amplitudes above 5.0 are not shown, arrowheads). For the U2415b,

mains noise (50 Hz) was apparent at high-luminance. lum., luminance.

In general, LCD response times -- the duration of the rise or fall of a step from one luminance

level to another -- vary as a function of both step source and destination luminance. This

nonlinear behaviour is owing largely to mechanisms of response time compensation (RTC)

p. 18

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

(e.g., the work of McCartney [25]), a feature of many modern LCDs designed to enhance video.

RTC mechanisms speed luminance transitions by transiently altering the voltage applied to the

liquid crystal associated with individual pixels (e.g., Figure 1 in [27]; Figure 5 in [24]). We

measured the CG247X’s response times by presenting luminance steps -- both increments and

decrements -- to the linearized photodiode device. Step source and destination took values 0,

25, 50, 75, or 100%. As illustrated in Figure 5, response times varied as a function of both

luminance step source and destination. For example, stepping from 0% luminance to 25%

luminance took 24.5 ms, stepping from 75% to 100% took 12.9 ms, and stepping from 25% to

0% took 8.1 ms. All of these steps are the same height, but response times differ markedly.

Overall, the response times of our consumer-grade LCD were less than the CG247X response

times. However, as we will illustrate below, faster is not better; although RTC mechanisms

reduced the response times of our consumer-grade LCD, they contaminated displayed

luminance with overshoot and undershoot artifacts which are problematic for many applications

in clinical and experimental vision research, including the presentation of mean-modulated

flicker. RTC mechanisms lower “black-white-black” and “grey-to-grey” response times, which are

used to promote displays to the gaming community and other consumer markets.

**Figure 5 caption** : Response times. ( **A** ) CG247X response times. The leftmost gray box

(labelled “0%”) encompasses four points showing mean response times for transitions

from source luminance = 0% to destination luminances = 25, 50, 75, and 100% (x axis).

These rise times (upward triangles) decreased with increasing destination luminance.

The gray box labelled “25%” shows mean response times of transitions from source

luminance = 25% to destination luminances = 0, 50, 75, and 100%. The fall time

(downward triangle), from 25% to 0% luminance, was less than the rise times. Overall,

p. 19

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

response times varied as a function of both source and destination luminance, as is

generally expected of LCDs. We made 10 measurements at each source/destination

luminance pair; error bars, where not obscured by symbols, mark the full range (from

minimum to maximum) of these 10 measurements. ( **B** ) U2415b response times.

Graphical conventions are as in A. Overall, U2415b response times were less than

CG247X response times.

At the outset of this study, we made preliminary measurements similar to those illustrated in

Figure 5. We noticed that rise and fall times straddling 50% luminance were approximately

equal (e.g., rise time from 25% to 75% = 16.3 ms; fall time from 75% to 25% = 17.1 ms) which

led us to wonder whether the CG247X could be used to display achromatic, mean-modulated

flicker without the introduction of unworkable artifacts. To better determine the CG247X’s

potential suitability for presenting mean-modulated flicker, and its susceptibility, or otherwise, to

overshoot and undershoot artifacts typical of LCDs implementing RTC mechanisms, we

presented mean-modulated flicker on both the CG247X and our consumer-grade display, using

the linearized photodiode device to measure luminance over time. We used a flicker period of

20 frames (333.3 ms), and contrast ranging from 20 to 100%. As illustrated in Figure 6, the

consumer-grade display’s luminance traces revealed overshoot and undershoot artifacts

symptomatic of RTC. The CG247X’s luminance traces, however, appeared free of RTC artifacts.

We used these traces to estimate response times specific to mean-modulated flicker, illustrated

in Figure 7. Overall, CG247X rise and fall times were greater than those of our consumer-grade

LCD. However, with the exception of 100% contrast, CG247X rise and fall times were

approximately equal, indicating its potential suitability for presenting mean-modulated flicker.

p. 20

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

**Figure 6 caption** : Example responses of the CG247X (upper) and the U2415b (lower)

to mean-modulated flicker. Flicker period = 20 frames (333.3 ms), and contrast = 20 to

100% in increments of 20 as marked. At 40% contrast, the arrowheads show examples

of luminance step source and destination as used in the computation of response times

(Fig. 7). For each display, we normalized traces to the luminance step destination at

100% contrast. For the U2415b, over- and undershoot are readily apparent at low and

moderate contrast. The CG247X, however, shows exponential rise and fall, regardless of

contrast.

**Figure 7 caption** : Response times of mean-modulated flicker. Overall, CG247X ( **A** ) rise

(upward triangles) and fall (downward triangles) times were greater than U2415b ( **B** ) rise

and fall times. With the exception of 100% contrast, CG247X rise and fall times were

approximately equal, indicating its potential suitability for presenting mean-modulated

flicker. Each symbol represents the mean of 10 measurements. Error bars, where not

obscured by symbols, mark the full range (minimum to maximum) of the 10

measurements.

To further determine whether the CG247X could be used to display achromatic,

mean-modulated flicker without the introduction of unworkable artifacts, we presented flicker at

frequencies ranging from 0.94 to 30 Hz and contrasts ranging from 20 to 100%. We used

recorded traces (similar to those in Figure 6) to derive cycle-averaged luminance. In Figure 8,

we illustrate how cycle-averaged luminance was approximately constant for all flicker

frequencies, and for contrasts up to 80%. At 100% contrast, cycle-averaged luminance

decreased with flicker frequency, indicating that, at full contrast, the monitor is not suitable for

p. 21

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

presenting mean-modulated flicker. Cycle-averaged luminance recorded from our

consumer-grade LCD (Dell U2415b) varied as a function of flicker frequency at all contrasts

tested; this variation is problematic for presenting achromatic, mean-modulated flicker. We also

used CG247X traces to derive cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance. In Figure 8, we illustrate how

cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance decreased with flicker frequency, indicative of loss of contrast.

The consumer-grade LCD was affected by both changes in cycle-averaged luminance and loss

of contrast.

**Figure 8 caption** : Cycle-averaged luminance and root-mean-squared luminance of

mean-modulated flicker. We presented mean-modulated flicker at a range of flicker

frequencies (0.94 to 30 Hz) and contrasts (20 to 100%). We used waveforms (e.g.,

Figure 6) recorded from the CG247X ( **A** ) to derive cycle-averaged luminance; we

divisively normalized that derived measure using the cycle-averaged luminance of a

“reference” waveform, that is, the response to contrast = 20% and flicker frequency =

0.94 Hz. This relatively low-contrast, low-frequency waveform was chosen as reference

because it should be easily realized by both displays. For clarity, cycle-averaged

responses for contrast = 40, 60, 80, and 100% are offset by -0.1, -0.2, -0.3, and -0.4 log

units, respectively (arrowheads). As shown, cycle-averaged luminance was

approximately constant for contrast = 20 to 80% at all flicker frequencies tested (0.94 to

30 Hz). At contrast = 100%, cycle-averaged luminance decreased with flicker frequency.

Cycle-averaged luminance recorded from the consumer-grade U2415b ( **B** ) increased

with flicker frequency at all contrasts tested. Graphical conventions are as in A. We used

waveforms recorded from the CG247X ( **C** ) to derive cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance;

we divisively normalized that derived measure using cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance of

p. 22

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

the reference waveform (20%, 0.94 Hz). As shown, at all contrasts tested (20 to 100%),

cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance decreased with flicker frequency, indicative of a loss of

effective contrast. Cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance recorded from the U2415b ( **D** )

revealed both increases and decreases to effective contrast with flicker frequency. Each

symbol is the average of 10 measurements. (None of the data in panels C and D is

offset.) We modeled cycle-average luminance and r.m.s. luminance on the CG247X as a

causal exponential decay (Methods). This model comprised one free parameter, . For τ

the illustrated fit (blue),  = 6.6 ms. The red symbols in panel C (slightly offset rightward τ

for clarity) show the result of a validation experiment (see _Discussion_ ), wherein we used

our model to stabilize cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance across flicker frequency. Each

red symbol is the average of six measurements.

Taken together, Figure 8, and the traces used to derive the measures plotted there, indicated a

simple relationship between nominal and displayed luminance on the CG247X, namely, that the

latter was, simply, a low-pass-filtered version of the former. To test this hypothesis, we modeled

the function transferring nominal luminance to displayed luminance as a causal, exponential

decay (Methods). We optimized the single free parameter in this model, the time constant of the

exponential decay ( ), by minimizing the sum of the squared error between the model-derived τ

cycle-averaged mean luminance and cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance, and those derived from

the photodiode traces. For the CG247X, the fit is illustrated in Figure 8 (blue). There, the fitted

parameter,, was 6.6 ms. To assess the fit to cycle-averaged luminance, we computed the τ

root-mean-square error (RMSE) separately at each flicker contrast. For the CG247X, the RMSE

was negligibly small for contrasts from 20 to 80% (ranging from 6.0e-4 to 6.3e-3 normalized

units). At 100% contrast, RMSE was highest at 0.093. This simple model was a poor fit to the

p. 23

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

U2415b, not illustrated in Figure 8. For the U2415b, RMSEs were high, ranging from 0.04 at

20% contrast to 0.15 at 60% contrast. To assess the fit to cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance, we

calculated the square of Pearson's correlation coefficient, R [2 ], separately at each flicker contrast.

For the CG247X, R [2 ] was high, ranging from 0.9965 to 0.9999. As expected, the same

calculation for the U2415b was consistent with a poor fit; at its worst, R [2 ] = 0.03.

To quantify the nonlinearities associated with high-contrast, mean-modulated flicker, and to

quantify temporal dependence between frames, we used a paired-pulse paradigm [36, 37]. We

presented paired biphasic luminance pulses at position 5 (Figure 2, inset), systematically

varying the inter-pulse interval, T (Methods). We used the measured responses to individual

pulses to predict paired-pulse responses, and to model the display’s nonlinearities we

subtracted each paired-pulse response from its prediction. Figure 9 shows the nonlinear

behaviour of the CG247X and, for comparison, that of our consumer-grade LCD. In our

CG247X, a nonlinear mechanism appeared to speed the transition between white and black

(100% and 0% luminance, respectively; leftmost upper panel in Figure 9B). When paired pulses

were separated by 16.67 ms or more (the three rightmost upper panels in Figure 9B where

predicted and displayed luminance are approximately equal), the CG247X behaved linearly, that

is, we saw no evidence of temporal dependence between frames. In our consumer-grade LCD,

a nonlinear mechanism appeared to attenuate the transition to white (100% luminance; leftmost

lower panel in Figure 9B). This attenuation reconciles with Figure 6 (lower), which shows

marked overshoot at moderate contrast (e.g., 60% contrast, middlemost panel of Figure 6), but

a near absence of overshoot at high-contrast (rightmost panel of Figure 6). Compared to the

CG247X, the U2415b’s nonlinearities were large in magnitude and long-lasting. Paired pulses

separated by as much as 33.33 ms (the third lower panel in Figure 9B, where predicted and

p. 24

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

displayed luminance are unequal) evoked nonlinear behaviour in the U2415b, that is, we saw

clear evidence of temporal dependence between frames.

**Figure 9 caption** : Paired luminance pulses revealed nonlinearities in displayed

luminance. ( **A** ) Illustration of the paired-pulse paradigm. We presented a single biphasic

luminance pulse (e.g., left panel), parametrically varying its latency relative to a trigger

(cf. left and middle panels). We then presented a pair of biphasic luminance pulses (right

panel), parametrically varying the offset between pulses comprising the pair, T = 0, 1, 2,

and 3 times the frame period (frame period = 16.67 ms). Single-pulse responses can be

used to predict the paired-pulse response; differences between this prediction and the

displayed luminance model the display’s nonlinearities. ( **B** ) Nonlinear behaviour of the

CG247X (upper). The four panels show responses to paired pulses with various offsets,

T; we normalized responses (0, 0.5 and 1 corresponded to 0, 50 and 100% luminance,

respectively) and then subtracted the baseline. For each offset, the predicted displayed

luminance derived from single-pulse responses is shown in blue, and the measured

displayed luminance in response to paired pulses is shown in black. The measured

responses are an average of 16 recordings. The difference, that is, the nonlinearity, is

shown in red. For the CG247X, superposition (T = 0 ms) of pulses evoked a nonlinearity

which accelerated the transition from 100% luminance to 0% luminance. There was

negligible nonlinearity of displayed lumiance for T >= 16.67 ms. Compared to the

CG247X’s nonlinearity, the U2415b’s nonlinearity (lower panels) was large in magnitude

and long-lasting, affecting subsequent frames (to T = 33.33 ms). Graphical conventions

are as in B.

p. 25

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

Discussion

We have presented a battery of tests used to weigh the relative merits of two displays. We are

specifically interested in the presentation of achromatic, mean-modulated flicker, as exemplified

by the studies cited in the Introduction [2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]. We recorded luminance waveforms from

two LCDs, and derived several measures, including spatial uniformity, response times, Fourier

amplitude spectra, cycle-averaged luminance, and root-mean-squared luminance. We

presented paired luminance pulses to quantify the displays’ nonlinear dynamics at high-contrast

and high frequency. We find the EIZO ColorEdge CG247X is suitable for displaying

mean-modulated flicker within a range of contrasts (<= 80%) and frequencies (<= 30 Hz). Unlike

CRT displays, relatively little has been written in the clinical and experimental vision literature

about LCDs. Here, we review detailed studies of LCD behaviour, discussing their findings with

respect to ours.

_Relationship to Previous Studies_

Wang & Nikolić [28] tested a Samsung 2233RZ LCD, comparing its performance to a

consumer-grade LCD, as well as a CRT display. They estimated spatial uniformity using

measurement procedures similar to ours, reporting spatial variability of approximately 15% at

high-luminance. Spatial variability of their CRT display (again, at high-luminance) was greater

than 20%. Our CG247X, which varied by only 3.5% at high-luminance (Fig. 2), was more

spatially uniform than all of their displays. Ghodrati, Morris, & Price [34] characterized the spatial

uniformity of several LCDs, including two displays marketed specifically to vision researchers

and clinicians (ViewPixx by VPixx Technologies Inc., Canada; and, Display++ by Cambridge

p. 26

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

Research Systems, UK). They too used procedures like ours, but quantified uniformity by

deriving Michelson contrast, C M = (L max - L min )/(L max + L min ), where L max is maximum measured

luminance (regardless of position 1 through 9) and L min is minimum measured luminance (again,

regardless of position). For comparison, we derived Michelson contrast for our CG247X at low-,

medium-, and high-luminance: 0.16, 0.05, and 0.03, respectively. For our consumer-grade

U2415b, Michelson contrast was 0.12, 0.07, and 0.08, respectively. That is, our displays

outperformed all those tested by Ghodrati, Morris, & Price (including their CRT display, for which

Michelson contrast ranged from 0.096 at high-luminance to 0.76 at low-luminance), with the

exception of their ViewPix, which showed very low Michelson contrast (0.023) at

high-luminance. These results, taken together with LCDs’ ability to render fine horizontal,

oblique, and vertical gratings with little contrast attenuation [28, 29], confirm that overall the

spatial uniformity of LCDs is usually superior to that of CRT displays.

Using high-luminance pulses, Wang & Nikolić [28] measured the reliability of their displays,

reporting errors of less than 0.04%. Although their results are difficult to interpret because

“error” was not clearly defined, they are likely to be comparable to ours: For flicker contrast at

100%, and flicker frequency at 0.94 Hz, we used 10 measurements of cycle-averaged

mean-luminance, and 10 measurements of cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance (Fig. 8), to

compute coefficients of variation (for comparison, we express those coefficients as

percentages). For our CG247X, we found coefficients of variation of 0.03% and 0.01% for

mean-luminance and r.m.s. luminance, respectively. For our U2415b, we found coefficients of

0.01% and 0.01%, respectively. At high-contrast (100%) and high-flicker-frequency (30 Hz), for

our CG247X, we found coefficients of 0.64% and 0.48% for mean-luminance and r.m.s.

luminance, respectively, and for our U2415b, we found coefficients of 0.33% and 0.24%,

p. 27

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

respectively. At moderate and low frequencies (< 30 Hz), and for all contrasts we tested (20 to

100%), we found little difference between our two displays in terms of coefficient of variation of

mean-luminance or r.m.s. luminance. Wang & Nikolić also reported temporal dependencies for

both their 2233RZ and their CRT display, that is, displayed luminance at frame _n_ depended “to a

degree on the luminance of the preceding frame [frame _n-1_ ]” (see their Fig. 4). We used our

response time data (Fig. 5) to test our displays’ temporal dependence, finding none for either

our CG247X nor our consumer-grade LCD. In other words, at 3 Hz (stimulus period = 20

frames, 333.3 ms), when analyzing luminance steps, step source had no apparent effect on

step destination. However, as we discuss below, our use of paired pulses revealed

high-contrast, high-flicker-frequency temporal dependence between frames on our

consumer-grade LCD.

Wang & Nikolić [28] measured response times (black-to-white and white-to-black, i.e., 100%

contrast) of their displays by fitting exponential functions to rise and fall step responses

separately. For their 2233RZ, they found fall time to be greater than rise time by a factor of 1.15.

The most straightforward comparison between their results and ours is as follows: at 100%

contrast, our CG247X’s rise time was greater than its fall time by a factor of 1.72 (Fig. 7);

therefore, the CG247X is not suitable for presenting mean-modulated flicker at 100% contrast.

Matsumoto and colleagues [38] noted that approximately equal rise and fall times are key LCD

behaviour for presenting flickering stimuli. At 80% contrast, we found a much smaller

discrepancy between fall time and rise time: the former was greater than the latter by a factor of

only 1.05. For the consumer-grade LCD tested by Wang & Nikolić, fall time was greater than

rise time by a factor of 2.35. Both our CG247X and our consumer-grade LCD outperformed their

consumer-grade LCD.

p. 28

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

Our response time means (Fig. 7) were, overall, similar to those reported by other detailed

characterizations of LCD behaviour [39, 24]. Our CG247X and our consumer-grade LCD mean

rise (fall) times were 13.64 (17.10) ms and 8.21 (7.8) ms, respectively. The latter compares

favourably to the times reported by Elze & Tanner [24]. Like Elze & Tanner, we found

discrepancies between our measurements and vendor-issued responses times (CG247X:

gray-to-gray = 10 ms, and black-to-white = no data; U2415b: gray-to-gray = 8 ms, and

black-to-white = 19 ms). On several LCDs, Watson [39] quantified motion blur, that is,

“streaking” introduced to frames when a sluggish display represents a moving object. Motion

blur is a luminance artifact largely determined by response time. Watson’s main measure of

motion blur, Gaussian edge times (GETs), varied between approximately 7 and 22 ms across

displays (see their Fig. 7). For comparison, we derived GETs for the waveforms we illustrated

above in our Fig. 6. To do so, we used the “temporal step” method described by Watson,

convolving those waveforms with a rectangular pulse (duration = 16.67 ms), fitting a cumulative

Gaussian (Equations 1 & 2 in [39]), and recording the temporal interval between 10% and 90%

points on that curve. We averaged GETs over all contrasts represented in Fig. 6 (20 to 100%),

finding mean (s.d.) values comparable to Watson’s: CG247X = 20.5 (0.2) ms and U2415b =

12.4 (1.8) ms. GET is a poorly performing metric where temporal responses show over- and

undershoot [39]; this poor performance is reflected in the relatively large s.d. for our

consumer-grade LCD (s.d. = 1.8 ms), which showed clear evidence of over- and undershoot

(Fig. 6).

We used paired luminance pulses to examine the temporal dynamics of artifacts relating to

high-contrast, high-frequency flicker. Ghodrati, Morris, & Price [34] also examined artifact

p. 29

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

dynamics, plotting photodiode traces for one- and two-frame-duration black-white-black pulses

(see their Fig. 6). Their photodiode device was not linearized, which complicates the

interpretation of their results. Nonetheless, they succeeded in demonstrating some disturbing

artifacts of displayed luminance, the first and foremost being luminance blips on their Display++

(an LCD specifically marketed to vision researchers and clinicians) which appeared immediately

after white-to-black transitions. None of our recordings on either of our displays revealed these

trailing blips. However, our paired luminance pulses revealed nonlinearities in both our displays

(Figure 9). These nonlinear mechanisms speeded transitions between extremes of luminance

(CG247X), or attenuated overshoot and imparted temporal dependence between frames

(U2415b).

Our spectral analysis (Fig. 4) of displayed luminance of (nominally) static test patches on both

our CG247X and our consumer-grade display revealed a frame response [24, 23, 35], that is,

luminance modulation associated with display refresh rate (here, 60 frames per second). For

both displays, the peak-to-peak amplitude of the fundamental component (60 Hz) of this

response was small -- on the order of 0.1 cd/m [2 ] . However, this amplitude reflects our

photodiode’s spatial aperture, which was large relative to the size of single pixels; because

frame inversion schemes typically have fine spatial structure on the scale of individual pixels

[35], the frame response of single pixels on either of our displays was likely much larger than

our measurement. Our spectral analysis confirms and extends measurements by Elze & Tanner

[24], who plotted the frame response fundamental amplitude for several displays, illustrating

diversity between panels from different vendors ranging from near zero (EIZO S2431W) to

approximately 2% (BenQ 241W). We extend the results of Elze & Tanner, quantifying the frame

response’s non-monotonic dependence on luminance, peaking at mid-range luminances (Fig.

p. 30

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

4). It is noteworthy that neither of our displays exhibited “luminance stepping”, that is, saturation

prior to meeting the destination luminance, which was apparent on the BenQ 241W display of

Elze & Tanner, and, there, discussed in detail.

_Model Utility_

The model we developed for the CG247X ( _Methods,_ Equations 4 and 5), which relates nominal

and displayed luminance, can be used to correct artifacts that the display introduces to

achromatic, mean-modulated flicker. We illustrate by way of the following example. On the

CG247X, we aimed to present flicker at a range of frequencies (from 0.94 to 30 Hz) while

keeping cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance constant, specifically, constant at that of (nominal)

80%-contrast flicker at 30 Hz. To do so, the nominal contrast of flicker was reduced at

frequencies less than 30 Hz. We used our model to determine these reductions. At each

frequency, we convolved the fitted exponential decay (Equation 5;  = 6.6 ms) with a square τ

wave (50% duty cycle), and then calculated cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance. We then adjusted

the amplitude of the square wave to yield the desired cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance. The

resulting nominal contrasts at flicker frequencies 0.94, 1.875, 3.75, 7.5, and 15 Hz were reduced

from 80% to 46.5, 47.3, 48.0, 50.9, and 58.2%, respectively. In a separate experiment, we

confirmed that these adjustments to nominal contrast indeed stabilized cycle-averaged r.m.s.

luminance (red symbols, Fig. 8C; RMSE = 0.03). In the model of Figure 8, and the

above-described example, the derived measure was cycle-averaged r.m.s. luminance. However,

a similar approach could be used to fix some other derived measure of displayed luminance

(e.g., cycle-averaged mean absolute luminance). For the U2415b, this straightforward approach

p. 31

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

to adjusting for artifacts is impeded by the fact that, for that display, no simple model relates

nominal and displayed luminance.

_Concluding Remarks_

The above-described studies of LCD behaviour, taken together with our test results, capture a

trend: for the intents and purposes of vision research, LCD performance continues to improve.

Our tests revealed marked differences between two displays, despite these displays’

vendor-supplied specifications being almost identical. In other words, these specifications were

entirely useless in weighing the relative merits of our displays for presenting achromatic,

mean-modulated flicker. One of the displays tested -- the EIZO ColorEdge CG247X -- appears

largely free of artifacts when presenting flicker within a restricted range of contrasts and

frequencies. We hope the present battery of tests proves useful to others developing rigorous

approaches to clinical assessment of vision and experimental studies of visual systems; we

intend to use it when introducing new displays to our experimental set-ups.

p. 32

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

References

1. Tham YC, Li X, Wong TY, Quigley HA, Aung T, Cheng CY. Global prevalence of glaucoma

and projections of glaucoma burden through 2040: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Ophthalmology. 2014; 121: 2081-2090.

2. Flanagan JG, Williams-Lyn D, Trope GE, Hatch W, Harrison E. The phantom contour illusion

letter test: a new psychophysical test for. In: Mills RP, Wall M, editors. Perimetry Update

1994/1995: Proceedings of the XIth International Perimetric Society Meeting, Washington, DC,

USA, July 3-7, 1994. Amsterdam: Kugler Publications; 1995.

3. Lamparter J, Russell RA, Schulze A, Schuff AC, Pfeiffer N, Hoffmann EM. Structure-function

relationship between FDF, FDT, SAP, and scanning laser ophthalmoscopy in glaucoma patients.

Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science. 2012: 53; 7553-7559.

4. de Lange Dzn H. Eye’s response at flicker fusion to square-wave modulation of a test field

surrounded by a large steady field of equal mean luminance. Journal of the Optical Society of

America. 1961; 51: 415-421.

5. Ramachandran VS, Rogers-Ramachandran DC. Phantom contours: A new class of visual

patterns that selectively activates the magnocellular pathway in man. Bulletin of the

Psychonomic Society. 1991; 29: 391-394.

p. 33

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

6. Quaid PT, Flanagan JG. Defining the limits of flicker defined form: effect of stimulus size,

eccentricity and number of random dots. Vision Research. 2005; 45: 1075-1084.

7. Norcia AM, Appelbaum LG, Ales JM, Cottereau BR, Rossion B. The steady-state visual

evoked potential in vision research: a review. Journal of Vision. 2015; doi:10. 1167/15.6.4.

8. Engel SA, Rumelhart DE, Wandell BA, Lee AT, Glover GH, Chichilnisky EJ, Shadlen MN.

fMRI of human visual cortex. Nature. 1994; 369: 525.

9. Baseler HA, Sutter EE. M and P components of the VEP and their visual field distribution.

Vision Research. 1997; 37: 675-690.

10. Sperling G. The description and luminous calibration of cathode ray oscilloscope visual

displays. Behavior Research Methods & Instrumentation. 1971; 3: 148-151.

11. Metha AB, Vingrys AJ, Badcock DR. Calibration of a color monitor for visual psychophysics.

Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers. 1993; 25: 371-383.

12. Bach M, Meigen T, Strasburger H. Raster-scan cathode-ray tubes for vision research-limits

of resolution in space, time and intensity, and some solutions. Spatial Vision. 1997; 10: 403-414.

13. Pelli DG. Pixel independence: measuring spatial interactions on a CRT display. Spatial

Vision. 1997; 10: 443-446.

p. 34

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

14. Krantz JH. Tell me, what did you see? The stimulus on computers. Behavior Research

Methods, Instruments, & Computers. 2000: 32; 221–229.

15. García-Pérez MA, Peli E. Luminance artifacts of cathode-ray tube displays for vision

research. Spatial Vision. 2001; 14: 201–215.

16. Brainard DH, Pelli DG, Robson T. Display characterization. In: Hornak J, editor.

Encyclopedia of Imaging Science and Technology. New York: J. Wiley; 2002.

17. Zele AJ, Vingrys AJ. Cathode-ray-tube monitor artefacts in neurophysiology. Journal of

Neuroscience Methods. 2005; 141: 1-7.

18. Gassler G. Cathode Ray Tubes (CRTs). In: Chen J, Cranton W, Fihn M, editors. Handbook

of Visual Display Technology. Berlin: Springer; 2015.

20. Farrell JE, Benson BL, Haynie CR. Predicting flicker thresholds for video display terminals.

Proceedings of the Society for Information Display. 1987; 28: 449-453.

21. Wollman DE, Palmer LA.Phase locking of neuronal responses to the vertical refresh of

computer display monitors in cat lateral geniculate nucleus and striate cortex. Journal of

Neuroscience Methods. 1995; 60: 107-113.

22. Williams PE, Mechler F, Gordon J, Shapley R, Hawken MJ. Entrainment to video displays in

primary visual cortex of macaque and humans. Journal of Neuroscience. 2004;  24: 8278-8288.

p. 35

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

23. Cristaldi DJ, Pennisi S, Pulvirenti F. Liquid crystal display drivers: Techniques and circuits.

Dordrecht: Springer; 2009.

24. Elze T, Tanner TG. Temporal properties of liquid crystal displays: Implications for vision

science experiments. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7: e44048.

25. McCartney RI. A liquid crystal display response time compensation feature integrated into

an LCD panel timing controller. Society for Information Display Symposium Digest of Technical

Papers. 2003; 34: 1350-1353.

26. Lee SW, Kim M, Souk JH, Kim SS. Motion artifact elimination technology for

‐ ‐
liquid crystal display monitors: Advanced dynamic capacitance compensation method. Journal

of the Society for Information Display. 2006: 14; 387-394.

27. Lagroix HE, Yanko MR, Spalek TM. LCDs are better: Psychophysical and photometric

estimates of the temporal characteristics of CRT and LCD monitors. Attention, Perception, &

Psychophysics. 2012: 74; 1033-1041.

28. Wang P, Nikolić D. An LCD monitor with sufficiently precise timing for research in vision.

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2011; 5: doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00085.

29. Zhang GL, Li AS, Miao CG, He X, Zhang M, Zhang Y. A consumer-grade LCD monitor for

precise visual stimulation. Behavior Research Methods. 2018; 50: 1496-1502.

p. 36

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

30. Brainard  DH. The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial Vision. 1997; 10: 433-436.

31. Pelli DG. The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: Transforming numbers into

movies. Spatial Vision. 1997; 10: 437-442.

32. Kleiner M, Brainard D, Pelli D, Ingling A, Murray R, Broussard C. What’s new in

Psychtoolbox-3. Perception. 2007: 36.

33. Boyd G. LCD Backlights. In: Chen J, Cranton W, Fihn M, editors. Handbook of Visual

Display Technology. Berlin: Springer; 2015.

34. Ghodrati M, Morris AP, Price NSC. The (un)suitability of modern liquid crystal displays

(LCDs) for vision research. Frontiers in Psychology. 2015; 6: article 303.

35. LaFontaine D, Wong M, Papalias TA. The cause of flicker in LCD screens. Electronics

World. 2006; 112: 15-18.

36. Sandberg A, Stark L. Wiener G-function analysis as an approach to non-linear

characteristics of human pupil light reflex. Brain Research. 1968; 11: 194-211.

37. Hung G, Stark L. The kernel identification method (1910–1977)—review of theory,

calculation, application, and interpretation. Mathematical Biosciences. 1977; 37: 135-190.

p. 37

DISPLAY OF MEAN-MODULATED FLICKER

38. Matsumoto CS, Shinoda K, Matsumoto H, Seki K, Nagasaka E, Iwata T, Mizota A. What

monitor can replace the cathode-ray tube for visual stimulation to elicit multifocal

electroretinograms? Journal of Vision. 2014: doi:10.1167/14.9.2.

39. Watson AB. Display motion blur: Comparison of measurement methods. Journal of the

Society for Information Display. 2010; 18: 179-190.

p. 38

# _Table 1_














# _Figure 1_

120


2

1

0


-1

-2










60

0










0.5 1.0
Nominal luminance (normalized)

# _Figure 2_

1.5

1.0

0.7


**A** **B**
CG247X U2415b

   






















- - - - - - ● - ●● - ●●






|●●●|●● ● ●●|● ●|
|---|---|---|
|● ●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●<br>● ●|● ●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●<br>● ●|● ●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●<br>● ●|

|● ●|Col2|●|
|---|---|---|
|●●●|●●<br>●|● ●● ●●●|
|●●● ● ● ●●●●●●●|||



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

Display position

# _Figure 3_

**A** **B**
CG247X U2415b

Azimuth Elevation Azimuth Elevation












~~●~~



~~●~~






0 0.5 1.0 0 0.5 1.0 0 0.5 1.0 0 0.5 1.0

Luminance (normalized)

# _Figure 4_


0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%

5.0

2.5

0


100% lum.

|CG|24|7X|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|Col15|Col16|Col17|Col18|Col19|Col20|Col21|Col22|Col23|Col24|Col25|Col26|Col27|Col28|Col29|Col30|Col31|Col32|Col33|Col34|Col35|Col36|Col37|Col38|Col39|Col40|Col41|Col42|Col43|Col44|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||


5.0

2.5



0

|U2|41|5b|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|Col13|Col14|Col15|Col16|Col17|Col18|Col19|Col20|Col21|Col22|Col23|Col24|Col25|Col26|Col27|Col28|Col29|Col30|Col31|Col32|Col33|Col34|Col35|Col36|Col37|Col38|Col39|Col40|Col41|Col42|Col43|Col44|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||


1 10 1000
Frequency (Hz)

# _Figure 5_

30

20

10


**A** **B**
CG247X U2415b

Source luminance (%)
0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100


0

0 100 0 100


0 100 0 100


Destination luminance (%)

# _Figure 6_

1.0

0.5


contrast:

20% 40% 60% 80% 100%


1.0

0.5


0


-0.2 0 0.2
Time (s)

# _Figure 7_

**A** **B**
30 CG247X U2415b

20

10

0

0 50 100 0 50 100

Flicker contrast (%)

# _Figure 8_

1.0

0.3

0.1

10

3.0

1.0

0.3

0.1


1 3 10 30 1 3 10 30

Flicker frequency (Hz)


CG247X U2415b











- - - - - 







- - - - - 


- ●









# _Figure 9_

**A**

**B**




|100|T|
|---|---|
|100<br>50|T<br>1 2 1+2|
|0|0|


0 0.1 0.2
Time (s)


50.0 ms



0.1 0.2



-1


0.0


Time rel. trigger (s)

# _Figure S1_

**A**

BPW21R



|+1<br>50k<br>+12V 10k 10u 100n<br>OP37|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|+1<br>50k<br>+12V 10k 10u 100n<br>OP37|+1<br>50k<br>+12V 10k 10u 100n<br>OP37|10k|10u 100n|
|+1<br>50k<br>+12V 10k 10u 100n<br>OP37|+1<br>50k<br>+12V 10k 10u 100n<br>OP37|||
|10k 10u 100n||10k|10u 100n|


**B** **C**


60

30

0




1.0












60 120

Displayed luminance (cd/m [2] )


1 1e3 1e6

Square-wave frequency (Hz)

