## **HoToPy: A toolbox for X-ray holo-tomography in** **Python**

Jens Lucht a, Paul Meyer a, Leon Merten Lohse b,a, and Tim Salditt a

a Institut f¨ur R¨ontgenphysik, Georg-August-Universit¨at G¨ottingen, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1, 37077 G¨ottingen,

Germany

b The Hamburg Centre for Ultrafast Imaging, Universit¨at Hamburg, Luruper Chaussee 149, 22761 Hamburg,

Germany

**Abstract**

We present a Python toolbox for holographic and tomographic X-ray imaging. It com
prises a collection of phase retrieval algorithms for the deeply holographic and direct

contrast imaging regimes, including non-linear approaches and extended choices of reg
ularisation, constraint sets, and optimizers, all implemented with a unified and intuitive

interface. Moreover, it features auxiliary functions for (tomographic) alignment, image

processing, and simulation of imaging experiments. The capability of the toolbox is

illustrated by the example of a catalytic nanoparticle, imaged in the deeply holographic

regime at the ‘GINIX’ instrument of the P10 beamline at the PETRA III storage ring

(DESY, Hamburg). Due to its modular design, the toolbox can be used for algorithmic

development and benchmarking in a lean and flexible manner, or be interfaced and

integrated in the reconstruction pipeline of other synchrotron or XFEL instruments for

phase imaging based on propagation.

**Keywords:** X-ray imaging; phase contrast; phase retrieval; computed tomography
### **1 Introduction**

The ability of X-ray radiation to penetrate matter is key to its use as a non-destructive probe

for the inner structure of objects, materials and tissues, by ways of computed tomography (CT).

Penetration relies on weak attenuation and therefore has always been a limitation as much as an

enabling property. Contrast vanishes for soft tissues and low- _Z_ materials at small scales, when

attenuation becomes insufficient. The more recent exploitation of phase contrast based on (par
tially) coherent beam propagation has helped to overcome these limits, offering contrast even to

unstained soft biological tissue, soft matter materials, and/or nanoscale structures in solution. This

makes X-ray phase contrast imaging and computed tomography (XPCT) a unique tool for a wide

1

range of applications. Recent cutting edge examples are as diverse as nanoimaging of neuronal

tissue for connectomics (Livingstone _et al._, 2025; Azevedo _et al._, 2024), morphological transitions

of nanoparticles in solution (Grote _et al._, 2022; Vesel´y _et al._, 2021), or ultrafast imaging of hy
drodynamics at X-ray free electron lasers (XFELs) for cavitation (Hoeppe _et al._, 2024) and fusion

confinement research (Montgomery, 2023). In all cases, efficient and high-quality phase retrieval

is a key element in phase-contrast imaging, in particular in the high resolution full-field variant of

holographic tomography (holo-tomography).

Emerging capabilities of fourth-generations synchrotron and XFEL sources, of larger and faster

detectors, as well as of optics and instruments enable higher spatial resolution, larger field of views,

and shorter acquisition times. At the other end of the image chain, new paradigms in image analysis

are fueled by machine learning, which requires large image libraries, for example as training data.

To meet both ends, reconstruction software and computing pipelines must keep up with the boost

in efficiency and throughput, while at the same time achieving image quality beyond the standard

linearized phase retrieval approaches.

A variety of toolboxes already exist for X-ray holography, tomography, and ptychography, re
flecting the growing demand for advanced reconstruction software. A few examples are _PyPhase_

(Langer _et al._, 2021), _CIL_ (Jørgensen _et al._, 2021), _TomoPy_ (G¨ursoy _et al._, 2014), _HoloTomoToolbox_

(Lohse _et al._, 2020), _Holotomocupy_ (Nikitin, 2023), _TOFU/UFO_ (Farag´o _et al._, 2022; Vogelgesang

_et al._, 2016), _PyHST_ (Mirone _et al._, 2014), _PtyLab_ (Loetgering _et al._, 2023), _PyNX_ (Favre-Nicolin

_et al._, 2020) and _PtyPy_ (Enders & Thibault, 2016). Each of these has its own strengths and capa
bilities. With HoToPy, we contribute implementations of recent advances in phase retrieval such

as (Farag´o _et al._, 2024; Huhn _et al._, 2022), iterative tomographic alignment techniques and image

processing tools, that to our knowledge are not yet available in other frameworks. We pair this

with high level implementations of smooth and non-smooth optimization. Emerging from the Holo
TomoToolbox (Lohse _et al._, 2020) for MATLAB, _HoToPy_ not only serves as a drop-in replacement

but extends it with recent methods in a more flexible and modular framework. By leveraging the

Python ecosystem including the ‘PyTorch’ (Ansel _et al._, 2024) library for GPU acceleration and

automatic differentiation, _HoToPy_ seamlessly integrates with other existing frameworks simplifying

integration into existing analysis workflows and pipelines. It offers a broad spectrum of function
ality for the entire range of data analysis, from image processing, phase retrieval, alignment, to

tomographic reconstruction, but also the simulation of experiments. The source code is licensed

under GNU General Public License and publicly available at Ref. (HoToPy, 2025). Up-to-date

installation instructions, detailed documentation and examples are provided therein.

Currently, HoToPy is rapidly evolving. In this manuscript, we like to showcase its current status

and demonstrate its capabilities on experimental data taken on the _G¨ottingen instrument for nano-_

_imaging with X-rays_ (GINIX) operated by our research group at the P10 beamline of the PETRA

III storage ring at DESY in Hamburg.

2

### **2 HoToPy toolbox**

The HoToPy package is a Python toolbox for holographic and tomographic X-ray imaging. Its

primary use is the reconstruction of X-ray phase contrast tomography— _holo-tomography_ —data

recorded at synchrotron or laboratory X-ray sources, but it can also be used for visible light or

electron holographic imaging. HoToPy is implemented using the machine learning library ‘PyTorch’

(Ansel _et al._, 2024), which provides strong GPU acceleration and flexible automatic differentiation.

High-performance tomographic primitives are provided through an interface to the ASTRA toolbox

(Palenstijn _et al._, 2013; van Aarle _et al._, 2015; van Aarle _et al._, 2016). HoToPy can either be used

as a software library in reconstruction pipelines, or it can be used interactively by the user, thanks

to its sane defaults and intuitive interface. Furthermore, real experimental datasets for testing and

development of novel algorithms are included.

**State-of-the-art numerical optimization** enables fast reconstructions and high numerical

efficiency. We provide algorithms for smooth and non-smooth optimization, including a robust

_proximal gradient method_ (PGM) with backtracking line search and adaptive step sizes described

in (Goldstein _et al._, 2014 _b_ ), an accelerated _alternating direction method of multipliers_ (ADMM)

(Goldstein _et al._, 2014 _a_ ) and _fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm_ (FISTA) (Beck &

Teboulle, 2009). Backtracking is especially helpful to achieve convergence even if (global) proper
ties of the gradient of the function to optimize or its Lipschitz constant are unknown. Equipped

with robust stopping conditions and implemented independently, they can be applied also by the

non-expert user in different projects.

**Automatic differentiation** (AD) is popular for training of (deep) neural networks (Paszke

_et al._, 2017; Baydin _et al._, 2018), where it is used to dynamically compute the gradient of the

models’ loss function. Thus, no finite-difference approximation or analytical derivation and explicit

implementation of gradients is required. For our application, this allows fast prototyping of new

algorithms or adaption of existing ones without the burden to manually derive and update explicit

gradients without scarifying accuracy and speed.

AD finds application in HoToPy, for example in the proximal gradient method (PGM) and fast

iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm (FISTA). Generally, a PGM produces an eventually con
vergent series, _x_ _k_ +1 = _P_ ( _x_ _k_ _−_ _τ_ _∇L_ ( _x_ _k_ )), where _P_ is a (non-smooth) projection or even a more

general proximal operator, _L_ the smooth (least squares) loss function and _τ_ a step size parameter.

Here, AD is applied on the inner gradient descent step, _x_ _k_ _−τ_ _∇L_ ( _x_ _k_ ). This is also known as _forward-_

_backward splitting_ (FBS) (Combettes & Pesquet, 2011). Even though the Fr´echet derivative of the

regularized error function for inline holography is analytically available (Davidoiu _et al._, 2011; Huhn

_et al._, 2022), using AD provides a high degree of flexibility to a PGM. For example, this allows

to extend or modify the `Tikhonov` algorithm with any smooth regularization or modification of

the error function, while still supporting even non-smooth constraints through the outer proximal

3

operator. In this way, a smoothed total variation regularization (see for example `TikhonovTV` ) or

a structured illumination function in the forward model can be easily implemented and can be

combined with any object constraint.

**2.1** **Phase retrieval**

A central step in holo-tomography is the computational reconstruction of quantitative phase and at
tenuation images from recorded near-field diffraction patterns, or _holograms_ . This so-called “phase

problem” poses a nonlinear, ill-posed inverse problem. Several algorithms have been developed,

incorporating different assumptions and priors, like assuming short propagation distance and a

single-material object (Paganin _et al._, 2002) or an optically weak object (Cloetens _et al._, 1999).

Furthermore, various forms of object constraints and regularization can be applied.

In HoToPy, holography related methods are provided through the `holo` module. So far, it is focused

on propagation-based phase contrast in the so-called “direct-contrast” as well as the “holographic”

regime. Most algorithms for the holographic regime support imposing priors as object constraints,

e.g., pixelwise non-positivity _ϕ_ ( _x_ ) _≤_ 0 _∀x_ or finite supports. An overview of the available phase

retrieval algorithms at the time of writing this article is given in Table 1, while an updated list

can be found in the online documentation. All are implemented with GPU computation support.

Moreover, they allow for astigmatism, so that the effective progagation distance or equivalently the

Fresnel number f can be different in the two directions orthogonal to the optical axis. This can for

example easily be caused by anisotropic magnifications in horizontal and vertical direction, see for

example the case of Bragg magnifiers (Spiecker _et al._, 2023). In addition, a number of methods

for preprocessing are provided. These include the automated removal of faulty pixels as well as

principal-component-analysis-based (Nieuwenhove _et al._, 2015) and curvature-based methods for

empty-beam division.

**2.2** **Computed tomography**

The tomographic methods are organized in the `tomo` submodule. Through interfaces to the ASTRA

toolbox (Palenstijn _et al._, 2013; van Aarle _et al._, 2015; van Aarle _et al._, 2016), efficient (multi-)GPU

reconstruction and projection algorithms in two and three dimensions are provided. For both

parallel beam and cone beam geometric models, the source, sample, and detector can be positioned

freely for each projection image. Thus, any inexactness of the tomographic trajectory can be

incorporated directly into the geometric model. This is computationally more efficient than aligning

and interpolating the projection images which also degrades image quality. The toolbox contains

methods based on image registration (Guizar-Sicairos _et al._, 2008) for determining deviations from

an assumed tomographic trajectory.

The center of rotation (CoR) can either be found by registering the shift between two opposing

projection images, or, for scans with an angular range larger than 0 _[◦]_ to 180 _[◦]_, two opposite segments

of a sinogram—ideally two half rotations—can instead be registered. In the latter, the CoR estimate

4

Name Class Reference

_Holographic regime_

Contrast transfer function (CTF) `CTF` (Cloetens _et al._, 1999)
— constrained CTF `CTF` (Huhn _et al._, 2022)
Intensity transfer function (ICT) `ICT` (Farag´o _et al._, 2024)
nonlinear Tikhonov `Tikhonov` (Huhn _et al._, 2022)
— (smoothed) TV regularization `TikhonovTV` (Lucht _et al., unpublished_ )
Alternating Projections (AP) `AP` (Hagemann _et al._, 2018)

_Direct contrast regime_

Paganin `Paganin` (Paganin _et al._, 2002)
generalized Paganin `GeneralizedPaganin` (Paganin _et al._, 2020)
Bronnikov-aided correction `BronnikovAidedCorrection` (De Witte _et al._, 2009)
modified Bronnikov `ModifiedBronnikov` (Groso _et al._, 2006)

Table 1: Overview of available phase retrieval methods for the holographic as well as the direct
contrast regime.

becomes an average over all acquisition angles, making it more robust for acquisitions with little

position precision. The registration can be repeated for sinograms from different detector rows

to further increase robustness and also determine small tilts of the rotation axis. The iterative

_reprojection alignment_ algorithm (van Leeuwen _et al._, 2018) in the toolbox enables reconstructing

and correcting rigid sample movement between individual projections during a tomographic scan. In

each iteration, the volume is reconstructed based on the current geometry estimate. (Re-)Projection

images are generated from the reconstructed volume, registered against the acquired images and the

geometric model for the respective projection updated according to the detected shift. In practice it

is often advisable to apply pixel binning and a bandpass filter to the projection images prior to the

alignment routine to accelerate the computation and improve the registration. Nonlinearities in the

detector response can cause stripes in the sinograms which lead to ring artifacts in the reconstructed

volumes. HoToPy contains implementations of additive (Ketcham, 2006) and wavelet based (M¨unch

_et al._, 2009) ringremoval algorithms to mitigate these artifacts.
### **3 Reconstruction example: Catalytic particle**

We demonstrate the HoToPy toolbox with the example of a X-ray holo-tomography dataset of

an isolated catalytic particle used for olefin polymerization. For an in-depth description of the

sample, and how the inner structure matters for the cataytic function in the application context,

we refer to (Werny _et al._, 2022 _a_ ; Werny _et al._, 2022 _b_ ; Vesel´y _et al._, 2021). The particle is attached

to the interior wall of a Kapton tube. The particle morphology and fragmentation (‘cracks’) is of

particular interest. The data was recorded at the P10 beamline of the PETRA III storage ring

at DESY in Hamburg with the _G¨ottingen Instrument for Nano-Imaging with X-Rays_ (GINIX).

The GINIX was used in its cone-beam configuration to achieve geometrical magnification and

5

effective pixel sizes down to the nanometer range. To this end, the incident beam is focused with

a Kirkpatrick–Baez (KB) mirror system onto a X-ray waveguide acting as quasi-point source for

holographic illumination. The waveguide (ID 4743) is a combination of two orthogonally crossed

thin-film waveguides with a diameter of 58 nm and depth of 600 µm each, functioning together

as a two dimensional waveguide (Kr¨uger _et al._, 2010). Two tomograms at two defocus distances

were acquired with 1501 projections each, covering an angular range of 180 _[◦]_ . The source-to
sample distance _z_ 01 was adjusted to 13 _._ 53 mm and 16 _._ 73 mm, at constant source-to-detector distance

_z_ 02 = 5110 mm. The photon energy _E_ ph = 13 _._ 8 keV was selected by a Si(111)-monochromator.

Images were recorded using a Gadox scintillator of 15 µm thickness fibre-coupled to an Andor Zyla

sCMOS sensor with a pixel size ∆ _x_ of 6 _._ 5 µm and 2160 _×_ 2560 pixels. The geometry corresponds to a

geometric magnification of _M_ = _z_ 02 _/z_ 01 = 378, respectively 305, resulting in an effective pixel size of

17 _._ 2 nm and 21 _._ 3 nm. The Fresnel numbers (with respect to the pixel size), f = ∆ [2] _x_ _[/]_ [[] _[Mλ]_ [(] _[z]_ [02] _[−]_ _[z]_ [01] [)],]

evaluate to 2 _._ 44 _×_ 10 _[−]_ [4] and 3 _._ 02 _×_ 10 _[−]_ [4] .

**Phase retrieval** First, the phase of the catalytic particle has to be reconstructed by phase

retrieval. To this end, the recorded raw intensity patterns are preprocessed by dark current sub
traction and divided by interpolated empty beam images taken before and after the tomographic

projections. The resulting normalized holographic diffraction patterns are also called _holograms_ .

Afterwards, residual low frequency background variations are suppressed by a least curvature in
painting of the background within a compact support of the particles. Prior to phase retrieval the

holograms of the second distance are magnified to a effective parallel beam geometry with effective

pixel size 17 _._ 2 nm and respective Fresnel numbers 2 _._ 44 _×_ 10 _[−]_ [4] and 1 _._ 98 _×_ 10 _[−]_ [4] .

An empty-beam divided hologram is shown in Figure 1a together with different phase reconstruction

in Figure 1b-c. Figure 1b shows a single step phase reconstruction using the contrast transfer

function (CTF) method (Cloetens _et al._, 1999) without the use of any constraints. Figure 1c-d

show a non-linear and constraint-based phase reconstruction using the `Tikhonov` (Huhn _et al._,

2022) algorithm with pixelwise non-positivity, and non-positivity combined with a compact disk
shaped support, respectively. All reconstructions were computed with the input of the recordings

of the two distances, assuming a homogeneous object with ratio _β/δ_ = 0 _._ 035 and applying a

two-level frequency regularization using the weights _α_ low = 2 _×_ 10 _[−]_ [5] _, α_ high = 3 _×_ 10 _[−]_ [5] (Huhn

_et al._, 2022).

By comparing the reconstructions, we can directly observe strong background variations in Fig
ure 1b and c. In the lower right corner of Figure 1c we can observe that this also affects the phase

reconstruction within the particle. Furthermore, the linear and unconstrained reconstruction in

Figure 1b incorrectly contains positive values, due to the convention used here a higher density

sample relative to the empty beam should solely have non-positive values (negative phase shift or

retarded waves). Thus, using this as prior knowledge for the reconstructions yields more faith
ful reconstructions (Figure 1c). Finally, if additionally combined with a disk-shaped support, low

frequency background variations are effectively suppressed (Figure 1d).

6

The corresponding code snippets used for the phase reconstructions are given in Listing 1. A

comparison of computation times of two phase retrieval algorithm with different set of constraints

is given in table 2.

Figure 1: Hologram and phase reconstructions of a catalytic particle. **a** Preprocessed holographic
interference pattern (hologram) of a catalytic particle. **b** - **d** Comparison of different phase retrieval
methods and constraints. The reconstruction in **b** uses an unconstrained linear contrast transfer
function (CTF). Reconstructions **c** and **d** are obtained using the `Tikhonov` algorithm. For both,
a pixelwise non-positivity constraint is used and for **d** additionally a finite disk-shaped support,
indicated by the dashed circle. Scale bars: 5 µm. Effective pixel size: 17 _._ 2 nm.

**Tomography** A three dimensional model of the sample is created from the phase projections

by means of tomographic reconstruction. A wavelet-based filter is applied to reduce stripes in

the sinograms. The corresponding reduction of ring artifacts in the reconstructed slice can be

seen in Figure 2a. The direct tomographic reconstruction of the sinograms (Figure 2b) suffers

from artifacts caused by inexactness of the acquisition trajectory, mainly due to sample movement.

With a geometric model which includes the sample movement (Figure 2c), the quality of the

reconstruction improves drastically and fragmentation cracks can be traced (Figure 2d). To extract

the sample movement from the acquired projection images, the CoR and drift were first estimated

by registration of opposite projections. The reprojection alignment algorithm was then applied to a

reduced dataset which was obtained by 8 _×_ 8 pixel binning and high-pass filtering with a Gaussian

filter kernel ( _σ_ = 40 _/_ 8). The influence of the Kapton tube’s strong edge was reduced by a directional

Fourier filter applied to images with observation angles close to the edge surface. The displayed

7

Figure 2: Tomographic reconstruction by the FDK algorithm. **a** shows a zoom into the center of
a reconstructed horizontal slice. Concentric ring artifacts (top left) are mitigated (bottom right)
after applying wavelet-based ring removal ( _l_ = 4, _σ_ = 1) to the sinogram. **b** displays a vertical
slice through a volume reconstruction assuming an idealized acquisition trajectory. **c** shows the
shifts of the projection images estimated by registration of opposite projections and reprojection
registration (8 _×_ 8 pixel binning, high-pass filter with _σ_ = 5, 100 iterations). **d** shows a virtual slice
through the volume reconstruction after applying the shift correction. The effective voxel size is

17 _._ 2 nm.

shifts were obtained after 100 iterations, taking about 9 _._ 3 min on a machine with 24 CPU cores

(Intel(R) Xeon(R) w7-3455) and an NVIDIA RTX A6000 Ada GPU. The FDK reconstruction of

the full volume takes about 2 min. The code snippets for the tomography reconstruction are given

in Listing 2.
### **4 Conclusion**

We have presented _HoToPy_, an open source toolbox for holographic and tomographic X-ray imaging

in Python. It provides a collection of phase retrieval algorithms for the direct contrast and in-line

holographic regime, suitable for propagation-based phase imaging at synchrotron and laboratory

_µ_ CT instruments alike. Tomographic reconstruction and alignment methods are also included.

It it easily extensible without sacrificing speed by leveraging automatic differentiation and GPU

8

computation, facilitating rapid testing of novel algorithms. Compared to our current ‘workhorse’

the _HoloTomoToolbox_ for MATLAB, _HoToPy_ not only integrates into the extensive ecosystem

of scientific computing in Python but also features iterative tomographic reprojection alignment

and new phase retrieval algorithms such as ICT (Farag´o _et al._, 2024) and TikhonovTV, extending

the approach of (Huhn _et al._, 2022) to TV regularisation. We have showcased the toolbox by

reconstructing the volume from a deeply holographic and severely misaligned dataset of a catalytic

particle.

The toolbox can serve at least four different purposes: First, it can be used for testing and develop
ment of algorithms, operated stand-alone on pre-recorded or simulated data, for example using the

supplied phantoms. Second, in the same manner it can serve class-room teaching and visualization.

Third, it can be operated with a script-based analysis pipeline for a specific instrument such as

the ‘GINIX’ instrument. In this case, wrapper scripts handling the instrument specific metadata

and data formats, or default reconstruction parameters can easily be written and supplied to the

user. Fourth, algorithmic implementations and functions of interest can be integrated into entirely

different reconstruction pipelines tailored to specific instruments and requirements. For example,

integration and interoperability with other phase and tomographic reconstruction platforms such

as CIL (Jørgensen _et al._, 2021) should be possible with little effort. Finally, beyond its primary

use as a tool for X-ray phase imaging, we envision it to be useful also for inline optical or electron

holography. To this end, the choice of natural units (pixel size, Fresnel number, optical indices) is

particularly helpful.
### **A Code examples from HoToPy**

For the complete reconstruction script, please refer to Ref. (HoToPy, 2025).

**A.1** **Reconstruction example: catalytic particle**

2

4

10

15

9

18

21

24

27

30

37

Listing 1: Source code snippet for phase reconstruction of a catalytic particle with HoToPy shown

in Figure 1.

3

6

9

13

19

10

28

Listing 2: Source code snippet for the tomographic reconstruction and reprojection alignment to

correct the acqusition trajectory shown in Figure 2.
### **B Computations times for phase retrieval**

We performed a comparison of the computation times for the phase retrieval listed in Table 2.

Algorithm A6000 Ada H100

_Single tomographic angle, two distances_

CTF, no constraints ( _single-step method_ ) 4 _._ 1 ms 3 _._ 9 ms
CTF, phase _ϕ ≤_ 0 ( _24 iterations_ ) 38 _._ 5 ms 30 _._ 2 ms
`Tikhonov`, no constraints ( _25 iterations_ ) 245 _._ 8 ms 217 _._ 9 ms
`Tikhonov`, phase _ϕ ≤_ 0 ( _25 iterations_ ) 284 _._ 5 ms 233 _._ 8 ms
`Tikhonov`, phase _ϕ ≤_ 0 & disk-shaped support ( _30 iterations_ ) 439 _._ 5 ms 317 _._ 6 ms

_Full dataset of catalytic particle_

CTF, no constraints 9 s 6 s
CTF, phase _ϕ ≤_ 0 72 s 47 s
`Tikhonov`, no constraints 6 _._ 1 min 4 _._ 4 min
`Tikhonov`, phase _ϕ ≤_ 0 7 _._ 4 min 5 _._ 1 min
`Tikhonov`, phase _ϕ ≤_ 0 & disk-shaped support 11 _._ 8 min 7 _._ 3 min

Table 2: Compute times of two phase retrieval algorithms implemented in _HoToPy_ with different
sets of constraints. Computations were performed on a NVIDIA A6000 Ada respectively NVIDIA
H100 GPU. For the single tomographic angle the 380th out of 1501 tomographic angles of the
catalytic particle dataset was used consisting of two defocus distances, same as in Figure 1. The
images have 2160 _×_ 2560 pixels. All computations were done using default settings in _HoToPy_ with
homogeneous object assumption with a ratio _β/δ_ = 0 _._ 0035 and two-level frequency regularization
_α_ low = 2 _×_ 10 _[−]_ [5] _, α_ high = 3 _×_ 10 _[−]_ [5] . All reconstructions were stopped using the same, default (relative)
tolerance condition. For the single tomographic angle reconstruction the iterations needed to met
these condition are given.
### **Acknowledgements**

11

The authors would like to thank Simon Huhn for inspiring discussions and his help analyzing the

dataset, as well as Jan Goeman and Markus Osterhoff for their kind support of our in-house comput
ing infrastructure. Moreover, we thank Maximilian J. Werny, Florian Meirer and Bert Weckhuysen

for providing the catalytic particle. We acknowledge Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY)

(Hamburg, Germany), a member of the Helmholtz Association HGF, for the provision of experi
mental facilities. Parts of this research were carried out at PETRA III and we would like to thank

Michael Sprung and Fabian Westermeier for assistance in using the P10 beamline. Beamtime was

allocated for proposal II-20211052. This research was supported in part through the Maxwell com
putational resources operated at DESY. The authors are members of the Max Planck School of

Photonics.
### **Funding**

We acknowledge partial funding by Max Planck School of Photonics as well as Deutsche Forschungs
gemeinschaft (DFG) (432680300 SFB 1456), and the German Minstry of Research and Technology

for grant Holo-Tomogaphy (05K22MG1) within the ErUM-Pro funding line.

**Conflicts of interest:** The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

**Data availability:** The source code is openly available under the GPLv3 license at Ref. (HoToPy, 2025)
and the data used for the examples can be obtained at Ref. (Lucht _et al._, 2025).
### **References**

van Aarle, W., Palenstijn, W. J., Cant, J., Janssens, E., Bleichrodt, F., Dabravolski, A., De Beenhouwer, J., Joost Batenburg, K. & Sijbers, J. (2016). _Optics Express_, **24** (22), 25129.
van Aarle, W., Palenstijn, W. J., De Beenhouwer, J., Altantzis, T., Bals, S., Batenburg, K. J. &
Sijbers, J. (2015). _Ultramicroscopy_, **157**, 35–47.
Ansel, J., Yang, E., He, H., Gimelshein, N., Jain, A., Voznesensky, M., Bao, B., Bell, P., Berard,
D., Burovski, E., Chauhan, G., Chourdia, A., Constable, W., Desmaison, A., DeVito, Z.,
Ellison, E., Feng, W., Gong, J., Gschwind, M., Hirsh, B., Huang, S., Kalambarkar, K., Kirsch,
L., Lazos, M., Lezcano, M., Liang, Y., Liang, J., Lu, Y., Luk, C. K., Maher, B., Pan, Y.,
Puhrsch, C., Reso, M., Saroufim, M., Siraichi, M. Y., Suk, H., Zhang, S., Suo, M., Tillet,
P., Zhao, X., Wang, E., Zhou, K., Zou, R., Wang, X., Mathews, A., Wen, W., Chanan, G.,
Wu, P. & Chintala, S. (2024). In _Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on_
_Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2_, ASPLOS
’24, p. 929–947. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Azevedo, A., Lesser, E., Phelps, J. S., Mark, B., Elabbady, L., Kuroda, S., Sustar, A., Moussa, A.,
Khandelwal, A., Dallmann, C. J. _et al._ (2024). _Nature_, **631** (8020), 360–368.
Baydin, A. G., Pearlmutter, B. A., Radul, A. A. & Siskind, J. M. (2018). _Journal of machine_
_learning research_, **18** (153), 1–43.
Beck, A. & Teboulle, M. (2009). In _2009 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and_
_Signal Processing_, pp. 693–696. IEEE.
Cloetens, P., Ludwig, W., Baruchel, J., Van Dyck, D., Van Landuyt, J., Guigay, J. P. & Schlenker,
M. (1999). _Applied Physics Letters_, **75** (19), 2912–2914.
Combettes, P. L. & Pesquet, J.-C. (2011). _Proximal Splitting Methods in Signal Processing_, pp.
185–212. Springer New York.
Davidoiu, V., Sixou, B., Langer, M. & Peyrin, F. (2011). _Optics Express_, **19** (23), 22809.
De Witte, Y., Boone, M., Vlassenbroeck, J., Dierick, M. & Van Hoorebeke, L. (2009). _Journal of_
_the Optical Society of America A_, **26** (4), 890–894.

12

Enders, B. & Thibault, P. (2016). _Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and_
_Engineering Sciences_, **472** (2196), 20160640.
Farag´o, T., Gasilov, S., Emslie, I., Zuber, M., Helfen, L., Vogelgesang, M. & Baumbach, T. (2022).
_Synchrotron Radiation_, **29** (3), 916–927.
Farag´o, T., Spiecker, R., Hurst, M., Zuber, M., Cecilia, A. & Baumbach, T. (2024). _Optics Letters_,
**49** (18), 5159.
Favre-Nicolin, V., Girard, G., Leake, S., Carnis, J., Chushkin, Y., Kieffer, J., Paleo, P. & Richard,
M.-I. (2020). _Journal of Applied Crystallography_, **53** (5), 1404–1413.
Goldstein, T., O’Donoghue, B., Setzer, S. & Baraniuk, R. (2014 _a_ ). _SIAM Journal on Imaging_
_Sciences_, **7** (3), 1588–1623.
Goldstein, T., Studer, C. & Baraniuk, R. (2014 _b_ ). _arXiv preprint_ .
Groso, A., Abela, R. & Stampanoni, M. (2006). _Optics express_, **14** (18), 8103–8110.
Grote, L., Seyrich, M., D¨ohrmann, R., Harouna-Mayer, S. Y., Mancini, F., Kaziukenas, E.,
Fernandez-Cuesta, I., A. Zito, C., Vasylieva, O., Wittwer, F. _et al._ (2022). _Nature Communi-_
_cations_, **13** (1), 4971.
Guizar-Sicairos, M., Thurman, S. T. & Fienup, J. R. (2008). _Opt. Lett._ **33** (2), 156–158.
G¨ursoy, D., De Carlo, F., Xiao, X. & Jacobsen, C. (2014). _Journal of Synchrotron Radiation_, **21** (5),
1188–1193.
Hagemann, J., T¨opperwien, M. & Salditt, T. (2018). _Applied Physics Letters_, **113** (4).
Hoeppe, H. P., Osterhoff, M., Aghel Maleki, A., Rossell´o, J. M., Vassholz, M., Hagemann, J.,
Engler, T., Schwarz, D., Rodriguez-Fernandez, A., Boesenberg, U., M¨oller, J., Shayduk, R.,
Hallmann, J., Madsen, A., Mettin, R. & Salditt, T. (2024). _New Journal of Physics_, **26** (3),
033002.
HoToPy (2025). Hotopy source code and repository.
https://gitlab.gwdg.de/irp/hotopy
Huhn, S., Lohse, L. M., Lucht, J. & Salditt, T. (2022). _Opt. Express_, **30** (18), 32871–32886.
Jørgensen, J. S., Ametova, E., Burca, G., Fardell, G., Papoutsellis, E., Pasca, E., Thielemans, K.,
Turner, M., Warr, R., Lionheart, W. R. B. & Withers, P. J. (2021). _Philosophical Transac-_
_tions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences_, **379** (2204),
20200192.
Ketcham, R. (2006). _Proc. SPIE_, **6318** .
Kr¨uger, S. P., Giewekemeyer, K., Kalbfleisch, S., Bartels, M., Neubauer, H. & Salditt, T. (2010).
_Optics Express_, **18** (13), 13492.
Langer, M., Zhang, Y., Figueirinhas, D., Forien, J.-B., Mom, K., Mouton, C., Mokso, R. &
Villanueva-Perez, P. (2021). _Journal of Synchrotron Radiation_, **28** (4), 1261–1266.
van Leeuwen, T., Maretzke, S. & Batenburg, K. J. (2018). _Inverse Problems_, **34** (2), 024004.
Livingstone, J., Bosch, C., Kuan, A. T., Beno¨ıt, L., Busca, P., Martin, T., Mazri, M. F., Xiang, W.,
Allen Lee, W.-C., Schaefer, A. T. _et al._ (2025). _Biomedical Optics Express_, **16** (5), 2047–2060.
Loetgering, L., Du, M., Flaes, D. B., Aidukas, T., Wechsler, F., Molina, D. S. P., Rose, M.,
Pelekanidis, A., Eschen, W., Hess, J., Wilhein, T., Heintzmann, R., Rothhardt, J. & Witte, S.
(2023). _Opt. Express_, **31** (9), 13763–13797.
Lohse, L. M., Robisch, A.-L., T¨opperwien, M., Maretzke, S., Krenkel, M., Hagemann, J. & Salditt,
T. (2020). _Journal of Synchrotron Radiation_, **27** (3), 852–859.
Lucht, J., Meyer, P. & Salditt, T. (2025). X-ray phase contrast nano-tomography of an olefin
catalytic particle.
https://doi.org/10.25625/CQ1EKY
Mirone, A., Brun, E., Gouillart, E., Tafforeau, P. & Kieffer, J. (2014). _Nuclear Instruments and_
_Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms_, **324**,
41–48.
Montgomery, D. S. (2023). _Review of Scientific Instruments_, **94** (2).
M¨unch, B., Trtik, P., Marone, F. & Stampanoni, M. (2009). _Opt. Express_, **17** (10), 8567–8591.
Nieuwenhove, V. V., Beenhouwer, J. D., Carlo, F. D., Mancini, L., Marone, F. & Sijbers, J. (2015).
_Optics Express_, **23** (21), 27975.
Nikitin, V. (2023). _Journal of Synchrotron Radiation_, **30** (1), 179–191.
Paganin, D., Mayo, S. C., Gureyev, T. E., Miller, P. R. & Wilkins, S. W. (2002). _Journal of_
_Microscopy_, **206** (1), 33–40.
Paganin, D. M., Favre-Nicolin, V., Mirone, A., Rack, A., Villanova, J., Olbinado, M. P., Fernandez,

13

V., da Silva, J. C. & Pelliccia, D. (2020). _Journal of Optics_, **22** (11), 115607.
Palenstijn, W. J., Batenburg, K. J. & Sijbers, J. (2013). In _13_ _[th]_ _International Conference on_
_Computational and Mathematical Methods in Science and Engineering. CMMSE_ .
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison, A.,
Antiga, L. & Lerer, A. (2017). In _Autodiff Workshop, Neural Information Processing Systems_
_2017_ .
https://openreview.net/references/pdf?id=SJTr5QMRZ
Spiecker, R., Pfeiffer, P., Biswal, A., Shcherbinin, M., Spiecker, M., Hessdorfer, H., Hurst, M.,
Zharov, Y., Bellucci, V., Farag´o, T. _et al._ (2023). _Optica_, **10** (12), 1633–1640.
Vesel´y, M., Valadian, R., Lohse, L. M., Toepperwien, M., Spiers, K., Garrevoet, J., Vogt, E. T. C.,
Salditt, T., Weckhuysen, B. M. & Meirer, F. (2021). _ChemCatChem_, **13** (10), 2494–2507.
Vogelgesang, M., Farago, T., Morgeneyer, T. F., Helfen, L., dos Santos Rolo, T., Myagotin, A. &
Baumbach, T. (2016). _Journal of Synchrotron Radiation_, **23** (5), 1254–1263.
Werny, M. J., M¨uller, D., Hendriksen, C., Chan, R., Friederichs, N. H., Fella, C., Meirer, F. &
Weckhuysen, B. M. (2022 _a_ ). _ChemCatChem_, **14** (21).
Werny, M. J., Siebers, K. B., Friederichs, N. H., Hendriksen, C., Meirer, F. & Weckhuysen, B. M.
(2022 _b_ ). _Journal of the American Chemical Society_, **144** (46), 21287–21294.

14

