# - ~~Self Dimensioning and Planning of Small Cell~~ - Capacity in M u lti Tenant 5G Networks

P. Muñoz, O. Sallent, J. Pérez-Romero

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC)

[pablo.munoz, sallent, jorperez]@tsc.upc.edu


_**Abstract**_ **—An important concept in the 5** **[th]** **generation of**
**mobile networks is multi-tenancy, which allows diverse operators**
**sharing the same wireless infrastructure. To support this feature**
**in conjunction with the challenging performance requirements of**
**future networks, more automated and faster planning of the**
**required radio capacity is needed. Likewise, installing Small Cells**
**is an effective resource to provide greater performance and**
**capacity to both indoor and outdoor places. This paper proposes**
**a new framework for automated cell planning in multi-tenant**
**Small Cell networks. In particular, taking advantage of the**
**available network data, a set of detailed planning specifications**
**over time and space domains are generated in order to meet the**
**contracted capacity by each tenant. Then, the network**
**infrastructure and configuration are updated according to an**
**algorithm** **that** **considers** **different** **actions** **such** **as**
**adding/removing channels and adding or relocating small cells.**
**The simulation results show the effectiveness of various methods**

**to derive the planning specifications depending on the correlation**
**between the tenant’s and network’s traffic demands.**

_**Keywords—Capacity planning; dimensioning; 5G networks;**_
_**multi-tenancy; Small Cells; SON.**_

I. I NTRODUCTION

Cellular data traffic has grown exponentially in the last few
years due to the increasing popularity of new mobile devices
and application services. A promising solution to satisfy this
demand in the forthcoming fifth generation (5G) is based on
Small Cell (SC) deployments [1]. SCs, which are more
economically attractive than macrocells, provide additional
capacity to the macro-cell layer, offering overlay coverage over
the area of interest. The dense deployment of SCs has proven
to be a cost-effective way to offer more capacity and more
spectrum reuse because of their smaller cell radius [2-3].

The future 5G radio access networks (RANs) will support
multi-tenancy, so that multiple mobile operators, service
providers, over-the-top companies and vertical sectors can be
served over the same infrastructure. In this respect, the
dynamic resource provisioning between tenants has been
studied in [4-5], where a central entity is responsible for
allocating resources via resource slicing. This kind of solutions
are intended for operating in short-term time scales. From a
perspective of larger time scales, multi-tenancy poses
unprecedented challenges to the owner of the shared RAN in
relation to radio network planning (RNP). For example, each

This work has been accepted for publication in the IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/
TVT.2018.2793418. Copyright (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use of this
material is permitted. However, permission to use this material for
any other purposes must be obtained from the IEEE by
sending a request to pubs-permissions@ieee.org. This work has
been supported by the EU funded H2020 5G-PPP project 5G
ESSENCE under the grant agreement 761592, by the Spanish
Research Council and FEDER funds under RAMSES grant (ref.
TEC2013-41698-R) and by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness (ref. FJCI-2014-19815).


“tenant” has specific characteristics on its geographic and/or
population coverage [6], which may also change frequently
over the time. To ensure speedy and efficient deployment of
services, traditional RNP has to be evolved toward new
models, where SCs are considered as a key element to increase
capacity.

Thanks to the Self-Organizing Network (SON) concept
introduced by the 3 [rd] Generation Partnership Project (3GPP)

[7], traditional management tasks in cellular networks have
been transformed into a set of automated functions. Selfplanning is defined in [8] as the process of identifying the
parameter settings of new network elements, including site
locations and hardware configuration. It was included within
the SON use cases defined by the Next Generation Mobile
Networks (NGMN) alliance [9]. To meet the envisioned
capacity of 5G networks, the concept of “Self-” has to be
applied to the dimensioning, planning and deployment of SCs.
By making these activities more dynamic, faster and automatic,
capital and operational expenditures can be reduced and
network performance improved. Thus, the new RNP functions
will operate at shorter time scales than today, involving a set of
decision-making processes that can be triggered by various
events. The diversity of these events will also be much greater
in the future 5G networks, ranging from call traces and cell
counters crossing a given threshold to the arrival of new
tenants. In addition, the decision-making processes will
manage a wider range of cost-efficient solutions, taking
advantage of the flexibility of SCs and being integrated with
the optimization tasks to avoid suboptimal network
configuration and inconsistencies.

Taking into account the gaps in the open literature, in this
paper, a novel framework that applies the SON principles to the
RNP problem is proposed to meet the challenging requirements
of 5G. In particular, this work tackles the RNP problem in the
context of 5G considering the following: (i) capacity
provisioning will be one of the most challenging issues for
network equipment providers; (ii) the multi-tenancy feature
will introduce additional complexity to the planning process
since multiple capacity conformance specifications over the
spatial and temporal domains will be defined; and (iii) SCs will
be considered as the main driver to satisfy the traffic demand
because they are a less expensive and easy-to-deploy
alternative to macrocells. Deploying SCs entails strong
implications in the way that the spectrum planning (or channel
allocation) is carried out, since the newly deployed SCs will
interfere other co-channel SCs. Nevertheless, the spectrum
planning problem can be solved in a more localized fashion
than in macrocell deployments, because of the smaller size of
SCs and the usage of high carrier frequencies, which facilitate

extensive spatial reuse. Thus, the proposed framework
advocates a more systematic and efficient way of RNP without
requiring vast computational resources. In this respect, when
network measurements, call traces and/or geo-located data are
available, the models to characterize network performance and
traffic estimation can exploit them. The framework also
reduces the gap between planning and optimization work by
defining a unified approach where the potential solutions are
intended to satisfy the traffic demand while minimizing
capacity overprovisioning in the network.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II the literature related to RNP is discussed. In Section

III the system model is presented. Section IV describes the
proposed architecture and analyzes the multi-tenancy feature
from a planning perspective. Results are discussed in Section
V. Finally, Section VI provides some concluding remarks.

II. R ELATED W ORK

The RNP problem has been widely investigated in
macrocell scenarios [10-11]. With the arrival of SCs, the RNP
problem has been addressed in the context of Heterogeneous
Networks, where the cross-tier interference between macrocells
and SCs has been crucial for an efficient deployment [12-17].
However, focusing on the SC-layer, there is a lack of studies on
the joint optimization of SC location planning and spectrum
planning. In general, spectrum planning (or channel allocation)
is seen as a separate issue that is solved only when the location
of the SCs is already known.

RNP as an optimization problem has commonly been
approached as a two-phase process, where the first phase (also
referred to as dimensioning) has to determine the minimum
number of cells to satisfy signal coverage, system capacity and
cost constraints, while the second phase tries to find the
optimal cell locations [10][12][18-19]. Eliminating redundant
base stations can be considered in the method as a third phase

[11], or it can be the fundamental basis of the planning method

[16]. Another approach is based on iteratively adding a cell
which has the highest increment of an utility function among
the set of candidate locations until network capacity reaches a
target value [20-21]. Note that, in this case, the a priori
dimensioning phase is not required. In general, the number of
cells to deploy is estimated as the total traffic demand of the
considered area divided by the average capacity of a cell. In SC
networks, the SCs can use different number and different set of
channels, which also may change over time. Consequently, the
estimation of cell capacity is not as simple as in macrocell
networks, where the frequency reuse is typically one. This
issue obviously affects the accuracy of the estimation of the
number of cells. Thus, to avoid relying on this number, in this
paper, the iterative approach of adding SCs has been selected.

The success of RNP depends to some extent on the model
that is used to characterize the network performance, typically
Monte-Carlo simulations [10][22] or stochastic processes [2325]. These models can be utilized to develop either proactive or
reactive planning strategies. Recently, the energy consumption
of base stations has also been modeled to provide energyefficient planning solutions [20][23][26-27]. From a more
practical perspective, existing commercial planning tools (such
as those mentioned in [19]) provide operators with multitude of
capabilities for efficient RNP, including realistic traffic maps


and accurate propagation models. However, there is very little
open information about methodology and principles due to the
confidential and proprietary nature of these solutions. Lastly,
the RNP of multi-tenant networks has received little attention

in the literature [28].

From the perspective of 5G, network slicing represents a
fundamental feature to accommodate traffic demands in multi
tenant networks without significantly increasing operational
and infrastructure costs [29]. Specifically, network slicing
consists of partitioning a common physical infrastructure into
multiple logical networks. The challenges that arise from
introducing this feature in 5G networks have been addressed in
several works [29-30]. The architectural issues for enforcing
slices in mobile networks have been studied in [31-32], while
the algorithmic aspects have been investigated in [33]. In that
work, an algorithm for dynamic resource sharing across slices
taking into account user association decisions has been
proposed. To enable network slicing in mobile networks,
various technologies such as Network Function Virtualization
(NFV), Software-Defined Networks (SDN) and cloud
computing have been considered [34]. In this respect, the
allocation of virtualized network functions, the network
programmability and the centralized coordination are key
aspects for the adoption of network slicing and the diverse
requirements of 5G mobile networks.

With network slicing, a much more efficient utilization of
network resources is achieved in multi-tenant networks.
However, when traffic volumes increase and the current
infrastructure is not enough to meet the required capacity,
investing on new resources remains as the only solution to this
issue. While the above references focus on network slicing to
optimize the resource usage during the network operation, this
paper proposes a framework to update the network
infrastructure during the (re-)planning phase. Such a
framework was initially introduced in [35], where the SC
location problem and spectrum planning were approached as a
joint problem. This paper further develops this initial work
introducing the following contributions and novelties:

- A novel implementation of the SC planning and spectrum

allocation processes is considered. Specifically, when a new
SC has to be deployed, the channel allocation process is
performed through an iterative process to try a variable
number of allocated channels.

- New scenarios are adopted to evaluate a greater variety of

planning actions, such as removing a channel in a SC.

- An exhaustive temporal analysis of the proposed planning

strategies is performed to evaluate the re-planning phase.
This phase takes place after deploying a new tenant and it is
especially effective when the tenant’s demand is a priori
unknown.

- The proposed capacity planning method is evaluated

against the state-of-the-art, where the spectrum allocation is
commonly seen as an independent function that is executed
only when the location of the SCs is already known.

III. S YSTEM M ODEL

Let us assume a scenario where a certain infrastructure
provider owns a RAN comprised of SCs. The SCs are intended
to meet the high capacity requirements in localized areas. The

provider offers at time _t_ such a RAN to a certain number _M_ ( ) _t_
of tenants, so that the tenants’ customers can get access to the
tenant’s service. Let denote as _D_ _i m_ ( ), _t_ the traffic demand (in

Mbps) of tenant _m_ in SC _i_ at time _t_, calculated as the sum of
the traffic from all the users attached to SC _i_ . The tenants’
traffic _D_ ( ) _t_ _D_ ( ) _t_


_D_ _i m_ ( ) _t_ the traffic demand (in


In a similar way, _[B]_ _i_ [] ( ) _t_ represents the required bandwidth on a

cell basis.

IV. F UNCTIONAL A RCHITECTURE

This section focuses on elaborating a reference framework
for multi-tenant management from the perspective of network
planning. The proposed model is depicted in Fig. 1. The
network, represented in the bottom of the figure, is
characterized by the network configuration, which is given by

_U_ _S_ ( ) _t_ and _[F]_ _i_ ( ) _t_ . The network performance can be seen as a

source of relevant information for the planning process. In
particular, it provides a collection of metrics related to the past
and actual traffic demand and also to the quality of the offered
services. The information can be given at either the SC-level or
pixel-level. In the former case, the metrics are derived from cell
counters and they are typically known as Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs). In the latter case, the information is derived
from call traces, which contain geo-located measurements from

users.

The functional architecture of Fig. 1 includes two main
entities described in the following. These entities can be part of
the management systems such as the Element Manager (EM)
or the Network Manager (NM) [37].

_A._ _Multi-tenancy management entity_

The multi-tenancy management entity acts as an interface
between the tenants and the network planning tool of the
network provider. From the perspective of planning, the SLA
defines the contracted capacity _A_ [ˆ] _m_ (in Mbps) that tenant _m_

demands to the network provider. Normally, it is expressed in
terms of aggregate (or average) values over relatively coarse
time and space scales. The SLA may also include some other

_Fig. 1. Functional architecture._


,


_D_ _i m_ ( ) _t_ can be aggregated into a new variable, _D_ _i_ ( ) _t_,


,


which provides the total traffic demand in SC _i_, i.e.:


_M_ ( ) _t_

( ) _t_ ( ) _t_


_M_ ( ) _t_
_D_ ( ) _t_  _D_ ( ) _t_
## i  i m,

_m_  1

##   D i m ( ), t .                (1)




.


,

1


Let also _d_ _u m_ ( ) _t_, be the traffic demand (in Mbps) of tenant _m_ in

the _u_ [th] pixel of the scenario ( _u_  _U_ ). The metric _d_ _u_ ( ) _t_ is

computed in a similar way to (1) in order to determine the total
traffic at the pixel-level.

The geographical area of interest is divided into a set _U_ of
grid points, called pixels. A subset _U_ _C_  _U_ of these locations

are candidate site locations for SCs. A typical placement of a
SC site is below rooftops. However, in many cases, the
selection of potential sites depends on how easily they can be
acquired and backhauled, e.g. if there exists line of sight to a
nearby hub. In this respect, an adequate filter of unaffordable
site locations to determine the subset _U_ _C_ will reduce
computational complexity of the later planning process.
Finally, let _U_ _S_ ( ) _t_  _U_ _C_ be the subset of site locations with
deployed SCs at time _t_ .

The transmit power and the allocated bandwidth of the _i_ [th]
SC are denoted by _[P]_ _i_ ( ) _t_ and _[B]_ _i_ ( ) _t_, respectively. The transmit

power is configured such that it provides a certain Signal-toInterference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR) at the targeted coverage
range [36]. With respect to the carrier frequency, SCs are
assumed to be deployed in higher frequencies than the 1~2
GHz, such as e.g. the 5 GHz considered by the 3GPP as a
feasible solution [36]. The frequency band is partitioned into a
set _F_   _f_ 1 [,...,] _f_ _K_  of _K_ orthogonal channels of bandwidth _B_ .

The subset of channels allocated to SC _i_ at time _t_ is given by

_[F]_ _i_ ( ) _t_  _F_ . Therefore, the total bandwidth allocated to SC _i_ is

expressed as _B_ _i_ ( ) _t_  _F_ _i_ ( ) _t_  _B_, where  denotes cardinality.

The capacity of SC _i_ is given by:

_C_ _i_ ( ) _t_  _B_ _i_ ( ) _t_  _SE_ _i_ ( ) _t_, (2)

( ) _t_

where _SE_ _i_ represents the average spectral efficiency

achievable at SC _i_ . In general, the spectral efficiency depends
on the radio access technology and the SINR conditions.

To determine areas in the network with a lack of capacity
and areas with spare capacity, the required bandwidth becomes
a key metric in the planning process. Specifically, this metric at
the pixel-level can be determined from the traffic demand and
the spectral efficiency as follows:


_i u_ ,( ) _t_  _d_ ( ) _ut_ ( ) _t_ .

_SE_ ( ) _u_


_i u_ ,( ) _t_  _SEd_ _i_ ( ) _ut_ _t_


_B_ _i u_ ,( ) _t_  _d_ ( ) _ut_ . (3)
_SE_ ( ) _u_

guarantees, e.g. related to QoS metrics.

For network planning purposes, the SLA has to be
expressed in smaller time and space scales that can be more
easily used when taking planning decisions. In particular, the

contracted capacity _A_ [ˆ] _m_ is translated into a set of detailed

planning specifications _A_ _m i_ ( ) _t_, that depend on SC _i_ and time _t_ .

To do this, the current or predicted traffic demand in the
network can be employed. This process, which ensures that the
contracted capacity is provided, depends exclusively on the
network provider’s side. As a consequence, the SLA is
simplified and tenants are excluded from gaining a detailed
picture of the network infrastructure.

Each time a set of detailed planning specifications are
generated, the multi-tenancy management entity sends this
information to the self-planning entity, which will use them to
determine whether the infrastructure needs to be updated or
not. This situation typically occurs when a new tenant is
aggregated or an ongoing tenant updates the SLA. In the
former case, the traffic demand of the tenant is unknown, while
in the latter case it depends on the geographical area where the
contracted capacity is modified. For example, if an ongoing
tenant extends its service coverage (e.g. according to business
plans) to a new geographical area that is owned by the
infrastructure provider, the traffic demand of the tenant in this
area is unknown. On the contrary, if the tenant modifies the
contracted capacity (i.e. due to an increase in traffic demand)
within the limits of the current service coverage area, the
temporal and spatial distributions of the traffic demand are
already known in this case.

Depending on whether the traffic demand of the tenant is
unknown or not, the detailed planning specifications are
generated in a different way.


other tenants’ traffic demand as follows:


( _t_ _B_ )  _A_ ˆ  _D_ ( _t_ _B_ ) .


_m_ ( _t_ _B_ )  _A_ ˆ _m_  _D_ ( _t_ _B_


_A_ _m_ ( _t_ _B_ )  _A_ ˆ _m_  _DD_ _B_ . (4)


_B_ ) ˆ _D_ _B_


Regarding the spatial variations of the traffic demand, the
contracted capacity at the busy hour _A_ _m_ ( _[t]_ _B_ ) is distributed among

the number _U_ _S_ ( ) _t_ of deployed SCs taking into account the

following condition:

###   A m i ( t, B ) [,]                 (5)

_i U_  ( ) _t_

### m ( t B )   A m i ( t, B ) [,]

### A m ( t B )   A m i ( t, B

_i U_  ( ) _t_


( ) _t_

_S_


where _A_ _m i_ ( _[t]_, _B_ ) is the contribution of the contracted capacity in SC

_i_ . Depending on the spatial correlation that can be expected
between the tenant’s traffic demand and the actual network’s

traffic demand, the detailed planning specifications per cell for
tenant _m_ can be formulated in different ways:

  - _Uniform distribution_ . In case that the spatial traffic

demand of the new tenant is unknown, an even
distribution of traffic is assumed. Estimation can be

conducted at the SC-level (6) or pixel-level (7):


_m i_ ( _t_, _B_ )  _A_ _m_ (( ) _t_ _B_ _t_ ) [,]


_m i_ ( _t_, _B_ )  _UA_ _m_ ( _S_ ( ) _t_ _B_ _t_


_A_ ( _t_ _B_ )  _A_


_B_


_B_


 _m_ (6)
_U_ ( ) _t_ [,]


_m u_ ( _t_, _B_ )  _A_ _m_ ( _t_ _B_ ),


( _t_ _B_ )  _A_ _m_ ( _t_ _B_

_m u_


_A_ _m u_ ( _t_, _B_ )  _AU_ _m_ _B_, (7)


_B_


_B_


where _A_ _m u_ ( _[t]_, _B_ ) stands for the contracted capacity at the _u_ [th]

pixel and _U_ is the total number of pixels in the area. If

uniform distribution at the SC-level is adopted, the values
of _A_ _m u_ ( _[t]_, _B_ ) at pixel _u_ are obtained considering a uniform

distribution of traffic within the service area of the
corresponding SC. On the other hand, when estimation is
at the pixel-level, the value of _A_ _m i_ ( _[t]_, _B_ ) in SC _i_ is obtained

from aggregating the values of _A_ _m u_ ( _[t]_, _B_ ) only for pixels

served by SC _i_ . Note that this value may be different to
that obtained from using (6).

- _Correlated distribution_ . In case that the correlation

between the traffic demand for the new tenant and the

already existing tenants is expected, areas with higher
traffic demand of other tenants will receive a greater
contribution of _A_ _m_ ( _[t]_ _B_ ) . Such an estimation can also be
conducted at either SC- or pixel-level. In the former case,
using the information on KPIs that measure _D_ _i_ ( _[t]_ _B_ ) in SC _i_

as an estimation of the spatial traffic demand of tenant _m_,
the detailed planning specification is given by:


In the first case (i.e. traffic demand is unknown),


_A_ _m i_ ( ) _t_, is


calculated based on the temporal and spatial variations of the
traffic demand from other tenants. Specifically, the temporal
variation of the traffic demand is mainly given by the traffic
fluctuations that take place over one day’s time. Such a
temporal pattern is typically repeated over different days. An
example sequence of total tenants’ traffic demand _D_ ( ) _t_ during
several days is illustrated in Fig. 2, where _T_ stands for the
one-day period and _t_ is the busy hour. Based on this, let _B_ _A_ _m_ ( _[t]_ _B_ )
be the detailed planning specification at the busy hour, which
can be estimated from _A_ [ˆ] _m_ and from the time variations of the


_m i_ ( _t_, _B_ )  _A_ _m_ ( _t_ _B_ )  _D_ _i_ ( _t_ _B_ )( _t_ _B_ ) [.]

### m i ( t, B )  A m ( t B )   D i ( D t B ) p ( t B

_p U_  ( ) _t_


_A_ _m i_ ( _t_, _B_ )  _A_ _m_ ( _t_ _B_ )  _D_ _i_ _D_ _B_


_B_


_B_ _B_


 
### m 


(8)


_B_





( ) _t_

_S_


In the latter case, the traffic measurements at the pixellevel are taken from call traces that provide geo-located
information for each user in an automatic way. Thus, the
_Fig. 2. Example of normalized traffic demand over three days._
specification is calculated as:

_m u_ ( _t_, _B_ )  _A_ _m_ ( _t_ _B_ )  _d_ _u_ ( _t_ _B_ )( _t_ _B_ ) [,]

### m u ( t, B )  A m ( t B )   d u ( t d B ) v ( t B

_v U_  ( ) _t_


_A_ _m u_ ( _t_, _B_ )  _A_ _m_ ( _t_ _B_ )  _d_ _u_ _d_ _B_


_B_


months). As a result, the system is able to anticipate the need
for more SCs and/or spectrum.

The capacity conformance is conducted in terms of the
required bandwidth _[B]_ [%] _i_ ( ) _t_ [ by SC ] _[i]_ [, which can be estimated as: ]


_B_ _B_


 
### m 


(9)


_B_





( ) _t_


where _d_ _u_ ( _[t]_ _B_ ) is the total traffic demand in the _u_ [th] pixel of


the scenario.

In the second case (i.e. traffic demand is known), the
temporal and spatial variations of the traffic demand of tenant
_m_ are considered for the generation of the detailed planning
specifications over such domains. In particular, if the traffic
demand is given at the SC-level, _D_ _i_ ( _[t]_ _B_ ) is replaced by _D_ _i m_ (, _[t]_ _B_ ) in

(8). If, on the contrary, the traffic demand is given at the pixellevel, _d_ _u_ ( _[t]_ _B_ ) is replaced by _d_ _u m_ ( _[t]_, _B_ ) in (9).

_B._ _Self-planning entity_

According to Fig. 1, the detailed planning specifications,

_A_ _m i_ ( ) _t_,, are used by the self-planning entity, whose aim is

twofold. The first objective is to check whether or not the
deployed network capacity fits the tenants’ demand. The
second is to provide the required changes in the network layout
and channel allocation, given by _U_ _S_ ( _t_  1) and _[F]_ _i_ ( _t_  1)

respectively, in case there is a lack of capacity. The selfplanning entity follows an automated approach characterized
by running an iterative process that is executed during the
network operation assuming that a set of SCs have already
been deployed. Thus, the currently deployed infrastructure is
incrementally adapted to the evolving tenants’ requirements to
make capacity expansion smoother, less costly and faster. The
proposed approach is applied to smaller regions that are
covered by a subset (or cluster) of SCs, so that dimensioning
and planning tasks are accelerated and simplified. As a result,
dimensioning and planning can be regarded as an automated
function that can be easily integrated into the SON framework.
This approach contrasts with the traditional planning, which
employs longer timescales to accommodate larger capacity
needs over the whole network’s geographical area.
Nevertheless, both traditional and SON-based planning are
complementary approaches to drive network expansion at
different time scales.

_1)_ _Capacity conformance monitoring_
This module watches over the network to determine when

the network infrastructure has to be reconfigured in order to
meet the tenant’s traffic demand while minimizing overprovisioning. The required bandwidth in the SCs can vary due
to high tenant’s actual traffic demand _D_ _i m_ ( ), _t_, the addition or

removal of new tenants (i.e. variations in _M_ ( ) _t_ ) or changes in
the planning specification _A_ _m i_ ( ) _t_, . Also, if the process is executed

### i ( ) t  1 ( ) t M  ( ) t min  D i m ( ), t, A m i ( ) t,

### i ( ) t  1 ( ) t M  ( ) t min  D i m ( ), t, A m i ( ) t,

### 1  min D ( ) t, A ( ) t .

######  D i m ( ), t, A m i ( ) t,  .

### B % i ( ) t  ( ) t  min  D i m ( ), t, A m i ( ) t,  .        (10)

_SE_ _i_ _m_  1


1


In case of working with variables at the pixel-level, the
translation to the SC-level is a simple aggregation of data per
cell. If the traffic demand of tenant _m_ at SC _i_ is below the
SLA’s planning specification, _D_ _i m_ ( ), _t_ is used to provide cost
effective dimensioning, since the SC’s bandwidth would fit the
actual required bandwidth. If, on the contrary, the traffic
demand exceeds the SLA’s planning specification, the required
bandwidth is then limited by _A_ _m i_ ( ) _t_, . To compute _[B]_ [%] _i_ ( ) _t_ [ in ]


_D_ _i m_ ( ) _t_ is used to provide cost

,


effective dimensioning, since the SC’s bandwidth would fit the
actual required bandwidth. If, on the contrary, the traffic
demand exceeds the SLA’s planning specification, the required
bandwidth is then limited by _A_ _m i_ ( ) _t_, . To compute _[B]_ [%] _i_ ( ) _t_ [ in ]

( ) _t_

practice, variable _SE_ _i_ can be estimated from the transmitted

data volume _[v]_ _i_ ( ) _t_ (measured in _bits_ ) under full-buffer

conditions and the amount of resource elements _[n]_ _i_ ( ) _t_ (measured


( ) _t_

practice, variable _SE_ _i_ can be estimated from the transmitted

data volume _[v]_ _i_ ( ) _t_ (measured in _bits_ ) under full-buffer


in _s Hz_  ) that have been used for transmission in SC _i_, i.e.:


( ) _t_

_i_ ( ) _t_  _v_ _i_ ( ) _t_

_n_ _i_


_SE_ _i_ ( ) _t_  _v_ _i_ ( ) _t_ [.] (11)
_n_


( ) _t_ [.]


With respect to variable _D_ ( ) _t_


_D_ _i m_ ( ) _t_, it can be estimated as follows:


,


( ) _t_


( ) _t_

_i m_ ( ) _t_  _v_ _i m_,


_D_ _i m_ ( ), _t_  _vT_ _i m_,, (12)


( ) _t_,


_i m_,,


where _v_ ( ) _t_


_v_ _i m_ ( ) _t_ is the total data volume (in _bits_ ) transferred in SC _i_


,


_D_ _i m_ ( ) _t_, the addition or


during time _T_ (see Fig. 2) for tenant _m_ .

The bandwidth of SC _i_, _[B]_ _i_ ( ) _t_, is dimensioned so that the

( ) _t_
###### required bandwidth [B] [%] i [ is satisfied at the busy hour ] [t] B,

which is calculated as:
###### t B  arg max  B % i ( )  ,    t T  1,..., . t       (13)



According to this, the _capacity conformance monitoring_
module triggers the _capacity dimensioning and planning_
module if the following condition is fulfilled for any of the
deployed SCs in _L_ consecutive periods of _T_ duration:

_B_ % _i_ ( _t_ _B_ )   _F_ _i_ ( _t_ _B_ )  _B_ (14)

where  [0,1] is an adjustable parameter that determines the

ability to support some variations in the traffic demand with
respect to the estimated value. Note that an increase in _[B]_ [%] _i_ ( _[t]_ _B_ )

does not always trigger the condition in (14), since there can be
spare capacity in the SCs. This situation can occur when: (i) the
network capacity has been intentionally overprovisioned; (ii)
the traffic demand has been overestimated when planning
tenants for the first time; (iii) the traffic demand of any tenant
has decreased over time; or (iv) a certain SLA has been
modified.

Lastly, note that, if the total traffic demand of any tenant
exceeds the contracted capacity, the _capacity conformance_


,


removal of new tenants (i.e. variations in _M_ ( ) _t_ ) or changes in
the planning specification _A_ _m i_ ( ) _t_, . Also, if the process is executed

proactively, the predicted traffic demand can be considered. To
this end, the _traffic forecasting_ entity provides the predicted
traffic demand in time _t_ at the SC-level (which can be
computed from historical data using statistical models) as input
in the self-planning entity. The proactive response is key as
long as the deployment of new infrastructure may require
substantial time compared to the evolution of the traffic
demand. Thus, the traffic forecasting entity predicts the traffic
growths on a relatively long-term time scale (e.g. weeks,

_monitoring_ module should communicate the multi-tenancy
management entity the need of reviewing (or negotiating) the
SLA in order to meet the traffic demand.

_2)_ _Capacity dimensioning and planning_
This module aims to determine the optimal solution (i.e. an
updated RAN) to cope with the varying traffic demand. A



candidate solution is represented by _U_ ˆ ( ) _[t]_


_U_ ˆ _S_ ( ) _[t]_ and _[F]_ ˆ _i_ ( ) _[t]_




candidate solution is represented by _U_ _S_ and _[F]_ _i_, which

represent a modified version of the actual network deployment
and spectrum allocation, respectively. The required bandwidth
of the candidate solution, _[B]_ ˆ _i_ ( ) _[t]_, is obtained from the _network_

_performance model_, which emulates the behavior of the
network with a certain layout and configuration. Unlike the SC

bandwidth (measured in steps of _B_ MHz), _[B]_ ˆ _i_ ( ) _[t]_ is a continuous

variable that depends on the traffic demand and the spectral
efficiency.

The dimensioning and planning is modeled as an iterative
process, initiated after satisfying (14), where a set of conditions
are sequentially checked at each time step in order to trigger
specific planning actions (i.e. adding/removing a channel and
deploying/relocating a SC). Such actions are accumulated
during the planning process and, after that, the infrastructure
provider is notified about the changes in the network to be
implemented. The execution of planning actions depends on
the limited budget of possible network changes that can be
taken in a specific period. This means that the infrastructure
provider is responsible for deciding when communicating the
changes to the infrastructure deployment team according to
other regulation and economic factors. Such a problem has
been studied in [28].

The planning process is summarized in Algorithm 1, where
_N_ _maxSC_ is the maximum number of SCs that can be deployed in

the area of interest, _K_ _max_ is the maximum number of channels
that can be allocated in a SC and , [0,1] are adjustable

parameters. In detail, in steps 1-20, the planning process
focuses on extending the capacity in areas with a lack of
capacity, while in steps 21 to 31, this process aims at
minimizing the capacity overprovisioning. Note that actions
such as removing channels or SCs where traffic has decreased
significantly may result in reduced interference, increased
quality and/or capacity. During the execution of this process, a
certain planning action (e.g. adding a channel) can be canceled
due to the execution of the opposite action (e.g. removing a
channel) depending on the actions carried out between the two
(e.g. a channel added in steps 1-6 may no longer be needed if a
SC is later on added in steps 7-20). The channel selection in a
SC is performed so that the SC-to-SC distance between the
given SC and the closest neighboring SC using the same
channel is the maximum possible. This process is summarized
in Algorithm 2. In addition, when a planning action is selected
the _network performance model_ is launched to obtain the value









_[B]_ _i_, is obtained from the _network_



































of required bandwidth,



_[B]_ ˆ _i_ ( ) _[t]_, corresponding to the new network




configuration. In case a new SC has to be deployed, _[B]_ ˆ _i_ [] ( ) _t_ is

calculated for each candidate site in the area of interest. Then,
the site with the lowest required bandwidth is selected.





|Algorithm 1 Capacity dimensioning and planning|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1:|// Adding a channel|// Adding a channel|// Adding a channel|// Adding a channel|// Adding a channel|// Adding a channel|// Adding a channel|// Adding a channel|// Adding a channel|
|2:|While  j |Bˆ(t B) <br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) <br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) <br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) <br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) <br>j|Fˆ( t)<br>j|B and|Fˆ ( t)<br>j|K<br>max|
|3:|Set|Fˆ( t)<br>j||Fˆ( t)<br>j|1;|1;|1;|1;|1;|
|4:| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i|
|5:|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|
|6:|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|
|7:|// Deploying a SC|// Deploying a SC|// Deploying a SC|// Deploying a SC|// Deploying a SC|// Deploying a SC|// Deploying a SC|// Deploying a SC|// Deploying a SC|
|8:|U(t)<br>While  j |Bˆ( jtB) B  /S and U S(t)  N mSC<br>ax<br>NSC K<br>max max|U(t)<br>While  j |Bˆ( jtB) B  /S and U S(t)  N mSC<br>ax<br>NSC K<br>max max|U(t)<br>While  j |Bˆ( jtB) B  /S and U S(t)  N mSC<br>ax<br>NSC K<br>max max|U(t)<br>While  j |Bˆ( jtB) B  /S and U S(t)  N mSC<br>ax<br>NSC K<br>max max|U(t)<br>While  j |Bˆ( jtB) B  /S and U S(t)  N mSC<br>ax<br>NSC K<br>max max|U(t)<br>While  j |Bˆ( jtB) B  /S and U S(t)  N mSC<br>ax<br>NSC K<br>max max|U(t)<br>While  j |Bˆ( jtB) B  /S and U S(t)  N mSC<br>ax<br>NSC K<br>max max|U(t)<br>While  j |Bˆ( jtB) B  /S and U S(t)  N mSC<br>ax<br>NSC K<br>max max|U(t)<br>While  j |Bˆ( jtB) B  /S and U S(t)  N mSC<br>ax<br>NSC K<br>max max|
|9:|k 0; // k: number of allocated channels|k 0; // k: number of allocated channels|k 0; // k: number of allocated channels|k 0; // k: number of allocated channels|k 0; // k: number of allocated channels|k 0; // k: number of allocated channels|k 0; // k: number of allocated channels|k 0; // k: number of allocated channels|k 0; // k: number of allocated channels|
|10:|Do|Do|Do|Do|Do|Do|Do|Do|Do|
|11:|Set kk1;|Set kk1;|Set kk1;|Set kk1;|Set kk1;|Set kk1;|Set kk1;|Set kk1;|Set kk1;|
|12:|For all xUˆ ( t) do:<br>C|For all xUˆ ( t) do:<br>C|For all xUˆ ( t) do:<br>C|For all xUˆ ( t) do:<br>C|For all xUˆ ( t) do:<br>C|For all xUˆ ( t) do:<br>C|For all xUˆ ( t) do:<br>C|For all xUˆ ( t) do:<br>C|For all xUˆ ( t) do:<br>C|
|13:|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x ;<br>S S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x ;<br>S S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x ;<br>S S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x ;<br>S S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x ;<br>S S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x ;<br>S S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x ;<br>S S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x ;<br>S S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x ;<br>S S|
|14:| <br>Fˆ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , x );<br>x S i| <br>Fˆ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , x );<br>x S i| <br>Fˆ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , x );<br>x S i| <br>Fˆ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , x );<br>x S i| <br>Fˆ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , x );<br>x S i| <br>Fˆ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , x );<br>x S i| <br>Fˆ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , x );<br>x S i| <br>Fˆ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , x );<br>x S i| <br>Fˆ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , x );<br>x S i|
|15:|Bˆ(t B) = Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t),…<br>i S<br> Fˆ( t) ,Fˆ( t) ) iUˆ( t);<br>i x S|Bˆ(t B) = Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t),…<br>i S<br> Fˆ( t) ,Fˆ( t) ) iUˆ( t);<br>i x S|Bˆ(t B) = Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t),…<br>i S<br> Fˆ( t) ,Fˆ( t) ) iUˆ( t);<br>i x S|Bˆ(t B) = Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t),…<br>i S<br> Fˆ( t) ,Fˆ( t) ) iUˆ( t);<br>i x S|Bˆ(t B) = Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t),…<br>i S<br> Fˆ( t) ,Fˆ( t) ) iUˆ( t);<br>i x S|Bˆ(t B) = Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t),…<br>i S<br> Fˆ( t) ,Fˆ( t) ) iUˆ( t);<br>i x S|Bˆ(t B) = Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t),…<br>i S<br> Fˆ( t) ,Fˆ( t) ) iUˆ( t);<br>i x S|Bˆ(t B) = Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t),…<br>i S<br> Fˆ( t) ,Fˆ( t) ) iUˆ( t);<br>i x S|Bˆ(t B) = Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t),…<br>i S<br> Fˆ( t) ,Fˆ( t) ) iUˆ( t);<br>i x S|
|16:|End For|End For|End For|End For|End For|End For|End For|End For|End For|
|17:|Select x* with objective: min  Bˆ(t B) ;<br>i<br>i Uˆ( t)<br>S|Select x* with objective: min  Bˆ(t B) ;<br>i<br>i Uˆ( t)<br>S|Select x* with objective: min  Bˆ(t B) ;<br>i<br>i Uˆ( t)<br>S|Select x* with objective: min  Bˆ(t B) ;<br>i<br>i Uˆ( t)<br>S|Select x* with objective: min  Bˆ(t B) ;<br>i<br>i Uˆ( t)<br>S|Select x* with objective: min  Bˆ(t B) ;<br>i<br>i Uˆ( t)<br>S|Select x* with objective: min  Bˆ(t B) ;<br>i<br>i Uˆ( t)<br>S|Select x* with objective: min  Bˆ(t B) ;<br>i<br>i Uˆ( t)<br>S|Select x* with objective: min  Bˆ(t B) ;<br>i<br>i Uˆ( t)<br>S|
|18:|While Bˆ(t B) k B and kK ;<br>x* max|While Bˆ(t B) k B and kK ;<br>x* max|While Bˆ(t B) k B and kK ;<br>x* max|While Bˆ(t B) k B and kK ;<br>x* max|While Bˆ(t B) k B and kK ;<br>x* max|While Bˆ(t B) k B and kK ;<br>x* max|While Bˆ(t B) k B and kK ;<br>x* max|While Bˆ(t B) k B and kK ;<br>x* max|While Bˆ(t B) k B and kK ;<br>x* max|
|19:|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x* , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ x* ,<br>S S C C<br>Fˆ( t)  Fˆ( t); Bˆ(t B)  Bˆ(t B) iUˆ ( t)<br>x* x* i i S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x* , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ x* ,<br>S S C C<br>Fˆ( t)  Fˆ( t); Bˆ(t B)  Bˆ(t B) iUˆ ( t)<br>x* x* i i S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x* , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ x* ,<br>S S C C<br>Fˆ( t)  Fˆ( t); Bˆ(t B)  Bˆ(t B) iUˆ ( t)<br>x* x* i i S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x* , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ x* ,<br>S S C C<br>Fˆ( t)  Fˆ( t); Bˆ(t B)  Bˆ(t B) iUˆ ( t)<br>x* x* i i S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x* , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ x* ,<br>S S C C<br>Fˆ( t)  Fˆ( t); Bˆ(t B)  Bˆ(t B) iUˆ ( t)<br>x* x* i i S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x* , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ x* ,<br>S S C C<br>Fˆ( t)  Fˆ( t); Bˆ(t B)  Bˆ(t B) iUˆ ( t)<br>x* x* i i S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x* , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ x* ,<br>S S C C<br>Fˆ( t)  Fˆ( t); Bˆ(t B)  Bˆ(t B) iUˆ ( t)<br>x* x* i i S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x* , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ x* ,<br>S S C C<br>Fˆ( t)  Fˆ( t); Bˆ(t B)  Bˆ(t B) iUˆ ( t)<br>x* x* i i S|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) x* , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ x* ,<br>S S C C<br>Fˆ( t)  Fˆ( t); Bˆ(t B)  Bˆ(t B) iUˆ ( t)<br>x* x* i i S|
|20:|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|
|21:|// Removing a channel|// Removing a channel|// Removing a channel|// Removing a channel|// Removing a channel|// Removing a channel|// Removing a channel|// Removing a channel|// Removing a channel|
|22:| <br>While  j |Bˆ(t B)  F( t) 1 B and Fˆ( t) 1<br>j j j| <br>While  j |Bˆ(t B)  F( t) 1 B and Fˆ( t) 1<br>j j j| <br>While  j |Bˆ(t B)  F( t) 1 B and Fˆ( t) 1<br>j j j| <br>While  j |Bˆ(t B)  F( t) 1 B and Fˆ( t) 1<br>j j j| <br>While  j |Bˆ(t B)  F( t) 1 B and Fˆ( t) 1<br>j j j| <br>While  j |Bˆ(t B)  F( t) 1 B and Fˆ( t) 1<br>j j j| <br>While  j |Bˆ(t B)  F( t) 1 B and Fˆ( t) 1<br>j j j| <br>While  j |Bˆ(t B)  F( t) 1 B and Fˆ( t) 1<br>j j j| <br>While  j |Bˆ(t B)  F( t) 1 B and Fˆ( t) 1<br>j j j|
|23:|Set|Fˆ( t)<br>j||Fˆ( t)<br>j|1;|1;|1;|1;|1;|
|24:| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i| <br>Fˆ ( t)= Channel_Selection(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) , j );<br>j S i|
|25:|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|
|26:|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|
|27:|// Removing a SC|// Removing a SC|// Removing a SC|// Removing a SC|// Removing a SC|// Removing a SC|// Removing a SC|// Removing a SC|// Removing a SC|
|28:|While  j |Bˆ(t B) B<br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) B<br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) B<br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) B<br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) B<br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) B<br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) B<br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) B<br>j|While  j |Bˆ(t B) B<br>j|
|29:|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ j , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) j ;<br>S S C C|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ j , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) j ;<br>S S C C|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ j , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) j ;<br>S S C C|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ j , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) j ;<br>S S C C|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ j , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) j ;<br>S S C C|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ j , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) j ;<br>S S C C|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ j , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) j ;<br>S S C C|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ j , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) j ;<br>S S C C|Set Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) \ j , Uˆ( t) Uˆ( t) j ;<br>S S C C|
|30:|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|Bˆ(t B)=Network_Performance_Model(Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t) )<br>i S i<br>iUˆ ( t);<br>S|
|31:|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|End|

32:


Set _U_ _S_ ( ) _t_  _U_ ˆ _S_ ( ) _t_, _U_ _C_ ( ) _t_  _U_ ˆ _C_ ( ) _t_ ; _F_ _i_ ( ) _t_  _F_ ˆ _i_ ( ) _t_,


 _i_ _U_ ˆ _S_ ( ) _[t]_

Algorithm 1 is designed such that the deployment of new
SCs is carried out gradually as the traffic demand grows and
new channels are allocated. According to this, as the number of
deployed SCs gets closer to the saturation point (given by

_U_ _S(t)_  _N_ _maxSC_ ), the threshold in the first condition of step 8 that

is used to deploy new SCs approaches the value of maximum
amount of allocable bandwidth in a SC (i.e. _K_ _max_  _B_ ).

Regarding the computational complexity of Algorithm 1, it
is worth highlighting that, as long as the dimensioning and
planning are rather long-term processes, computational
complexity is not a first-order requirement to consider.
However, to limit the complexity when the number of SCs
increases, the considered geographical area could be divided
into smaller regions so that Algorithm 1 is applied to each of
them independently.

From an economic perspective, each kind of planning
action entails a different cost for the infrastructure provider. In
particular, adding or removing channels represents the cheapest
solution since it can be executed remotely. On the opposite side
is the deployment of new SCs, which requires investing on new
infrastructure. The infrastructure provider can be interested in
balancing the priority of these two planning actions according
to its financial objectives. This can be done in the proposed

algorithm by tuning _N_ _maxSC_, which is the parameter that has a

direct impact on the deployment costs.













|Algorithm 2 Channel selection|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|1:| <br>Inputs: Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t), x: targeted SC;<br>S i| <br>Inputs: Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t), x: targeted SC;<br>S i| <br>Inputs: Uˆ ( t), Fˆ ( t), x: targeted SC;<br>S i|
|2:|Initialize: Fˆ ( t) ;<br>x|Initialize: Fˆ ( t) ;<br>x|Initialize: Fˆ ( t) ;<br>x|
|3:|Do:|Do:|Do:|
|4:|Calculate s ( x, y ); // s: distance between x and y|Calculate s ( x, y ); // s: distance between x and y|Calculate s ( x, y ); // s: distance between x and y|
|5:| <br> s ( x, y) if f  Fˆ( t)Fˆ( t)<br>s ( x, y) j x y<br>j<br> Inf otherwise| <br> s ( x, y) if f  Fˆ( t)Fˆ( t)<br>s ( x, y) j x y<br>j<br> Inf otherwise| <br> s ( x, y) if f  Fˆ( t)Fˆ( t)<br>s ( x, y) j x y<br>j<br> Inf otherwise|
|6:|s ( x)mins ( x, y),  f F ;<br>j j j<br>y|s ( x)mins ( x, y),  f F ;<br>j j j<br>y|s ( x)mins ( x, y),  f F ;<br>j j j<br>y|
|7:|iarg maxs ( x);<br>j<br>j|iarg maxs ( x);<br>j<br>j|iarg maxs ( x);<br>j<br>j|
|8:|Set Fˆ( t) Fˆ( t) f; F F\ f;<br>x x i i|Set Fˆ( t) Fˆ( t) f; F F\ f;<br>x x i i|Set Fˆ( t) Fˆ( t) f; F F\ f;<br>x x i i|
|9:|While|Fˆ ( t)<br>x|k;|


The parameter _K_ _max_ is also adjustable and it determines the

interference levels that are allowed in the network. For
example, by setting the maximum value, all the SCs can use all
the channels. However, a high value of this parameter may not
be recommended as it would result in excessive interference

levels, making the solution spectrally inefficient. Likewise, a


too low value of this parameter should be avoided since it
entails a waste of spectrum and an increased cost due to a faster
deployment of SCs.
The parameters  and  determine the amount of spare
capacity that is retained by the infrastructure provider in the
SCs e.g. to absorb eventual peaks of traffic demand. They are
jointly configured to avoid recursive channel allocations and
releases in the SCs.

Lastly, the parameter  establishes the sensitivity of the
planning action related to relocation of SCs that support
marginal amount of traffic. This situation happens, for
example, when a tenant’s contract expires leaving a large
amount of spare capacity in the SCs.

_3)_ _Network performance model_
To evaluate the candidate solutions, a _network performance_
_model_ is required. The objective of this model is to compute
the required bandwidth in the network to satisfy a certain
traffic demand. As observed in Fig. 1, the inputs of the model
are the traffic demand (either actual or predicted), the average
spectral efficiency and the candidate network configuration.

In the model, the transmit power _[P]_ ˆ _i_ ( ) _[t]_ for each SC of the

candidate solution is determined by:

_P_ ˆ _i_ ( ) _t_  _P_ _N_  _G_ _PL i_, ( _u_ _edge_ ( ) _t_ )  _F_ ˆ _i_ ( ) _t_  _SINR_ _edge_ (15)

where _P_ _N_ is the noise power measured in one channel,

_G_ _PL i_ ( ) _t_, [(] _u_ _edge_ ( ) _t_ ) is the path gain (loss) from SC _i_ to pixel _u_ _edge_ ( ) _t_

located at the cell-edge and _SINR_ _edge_ represents the target

value at such a distance. The range of _[P]_ _i_ ( ) _t_ is limited by the
maximum allowed transmit power, _P_ _max_ . The cell-edge is a

function of the inter-site distance (ISD), which is given by the
distance to the closest adjacent SC.

ˆ ( ) _t_

The received power _P_ _RX i_, ( ) _u_ at pixel _u_ when served by SC

_i_ using a single channel is given by:

_P_ ˆ _RX i_ ( ) _t_, ( ) _u_  _P_ ˆ _i_ ( ) _t_  _G u_ _i_ ( ). (16)

where _G u_ _i_ ( ) is the overall gain between SC _i_ and pixel _u_,
expressed as the sum of individual gains (losses) including the
antenna gain and the path loss.

The users are served by the SC from which they receive the
strongest received power. In this way, the function  ˆ ( ) _t_ _u_ ( )
returns the SC that serves the users in pixel _u_ (i.e. it defines the
service area of every SC). Formally, it is defined as:

 ˆ ( ) _t_ ( ) _u_  argmax _i_ _P_ ˆ _RX i_ ( ) _t_, ( ). _u_ (17)

Such a function facilitates the conversion between the SC and

pixel domains in the model.

The _SINR_ _i k_ ( ), _t_ [( )] _u_ at pixel _u_ when served by SC _i_ using

channel _k_ is expressed as:

( ) _t_


_i k_ ( ) _t_ ( ) _u_  _P_ _RX i_ ( ) _t_,


_SINR_ ( ) _t_ ( ) _u_  _P_ _RX i_, _u_


( ) _t_ _RX i_,


(18)





,


( ) _u_  _P_ ˆ _RX i_ ( ) _t_, ( ) _u_,

 ˆ 
###    ( ) t  ( ) t ( ) k  P ( ) t ( ) u   P


 ˆ 
###    ( ) jt  ( ) jt ( ) k  P RX j ( ) t, ( ) u  

 _j U_  _S_ \  _i_ 


( ) _t_ ( ) _t_ ( ) _t_

###   ( ) jt  ( ) jt ( ) k  P RX j ( ) t, ( ) u   P N

_j U_  _S_ \  _i_ 


  ( ) _k_  _P_ ( ) _u_  _P_





_S_


,

\ _i_


\  _i_


where  ( ) _jt_ ( ) _k_ indicates whether channel _k_ is allocated to SC _j_

( ) _t_
(with value 1) or not (0) and  _j_ is the average load.

Computing the SINR requires to solve a system of non-linear
equations due to the load-coupling, i.e. the load of a cell is a
function of the load levels of other cells [38]. To simplify this
procedure, the average load  ( ) _jt_ in SC _j_ is approximated by:


 ( ) _jt_  min  _CD_ ( _t_ ( ) _j_  _t_ 1) 
 _j_ 


( ) _t_  _D_ ( ) _jt_


_D_ ( ) _t_

( ) _jt_  min  _C_ ( _tj_ 

 _j_


_D_


min  ( _t_  1),1, 


(19)


where _C_ ( _jt_  1) is the capacity of SC _j_ at the previous time step.

The average _SINR u_ _i_ ( ) at pixel _u_ when served by SC _i_ is given
by:

### ( ) u  F ˆ1 i ( ) t k F   ˆ i ( ) t SINR i k ( ), t ( ), u

### SINR i ( ) t ( ) u  F ˆ i ( ) t k F   ˆ i ( ) t SINR i k ( ), t ( ), u       (20)

### i ( ) t ( ) u  ˆ ( ) t  SINR i k ( ), t


( ) _t_


Then, the spectral efficiency _SE_ _i_ ( ) _t_ ( ) _u_ at pixel _u_ is obtained
by:

_SE_ _i_ ( ) _t_ ( ) _u_  _f_ _RAT_ ( _SINR_ _i_ ( ) _t_ ( )) _u_ (21)

where _f_ _RAT_ ( )  is a function that depends on the radio access
technology (e.g. LTE). From the spectral efficiency and the
traffic demand at the pixel-level, the required bandwidth _B_ _i u_ ,( ) _t_

is calculated based on (3). Lastly, this information can be
aggregated on a cell basis using the function  ˆ ( ) _t_ _u_ ( ) as

follows:

|1 in [39] with 4. max SE  Parameter|4.4 b/s/Hz. Configuration|
|---|---|
|Parameter|Configuration|
|Deployment scenario|Urban, small cells, 0.4km x 0.4km|
|Operating frequency|5 GHz|
|Channel bandwidth|20 MHz|
|Cell bandwidth|4 channels|
|Propagation (path loss)|ITU InH model [40]|
|SC antenna directivity|omni-directional|
|SC antenna height|6 m|
|UE antenna height|1.5 m|
|SC antenna gain|2 dBi|
|UE thermal noise|-174 dBm/Hz|
|UE noise figure|9 dB|
|UE minimum SINR|-10 dB|
|SC TX power range|[10-24] dBm|

##  ( ) t  u i   ˆ ( ) t u B i u ,( ) t .              (22)

##  ( ) t  u i |   ˆ ( ) t ( ) u B i u ,( ) t

## B i  ( ) t  u i   ˆ ( ) t ( ) u B i u ,( ) t


.


( ) _t_


_t_


V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

_A._ _Simulation scenario_

An urban SC scenario with dimensions 0.4 km × 0.4 km
and a grid resolution of 5 m has been considered. To represent
the areas where deploying SCs is possible, e.g. no backhaul and
site acquisition constraints, 2% of the points (or pixels) in the
scenario have been randomly selected as candidate site
locations. The actual network layout and the traffic demand at
the busy hour in the situation before the consideration of the
new tenant are represented in Fig. 3, where the triangles
represent the location of the three deployed SCs and the values
in brackets are the number of allocated channels. Color scale

indicates the traffic demand density, which is non-uniformly
distributed over the considered area. The traffic demands
supported by SCs 1-3 are 8.8, 5.6 and 5.0 Mbps, respectively.

The _network performance model_ has been implemented
according to Section IV.B. Table I summarizes the main
parameters of this model. The transmit power _[P]_ _i_ ( ) _t_ is


_Fig. 3. Traffic demand and network deployment in the initial situation (before_
_new_ ~~_t_~~ _enan_ ~~_t’_~~ _s arr_ ~~_i_~~ _va_ ~~_l)_~~ _._

ISD [36]. The spectral efficiency function _SE(SINR)_ used to

( ) _t_

compute the average spectral efficiency _SE_ _i_ at SC _i_

depending on the SINR at each pixel is obtained from Section
A.1 in [39] with _SE_ _max_  4.4 b/s/Hz.

T ABLE I. S IMULATION P ARAMETERS

From a network planning perspective, the parameters used
in the _capacity conformance monitoring_ module to trigger the
planning actions are configured as:  0.95,  0.7 and
 0.05 . Parameter  is configured assuming moderate
traffic variations over the expected values. However,
depending on the provider’s deployment policies, this
parameter can be configured with a lower value in order to
provide higher levels of spare capacity in the SCs and thus
leaving some room for coping with unexpected traffic
variations. Regarding parameters  and , a reasonable
configuration of such parameters has been considered in this
work to react to traffic variations while, at the same time,
limiting the number of “re-planning” actions and targeting an
efficient resource utilization. In addition, the maximum number
of allocated channels per SC is set to _K_ _max_  3, while the
maximum number of SCs that can be deployed in the

_SC_
considered area is set to _N_ _max_  10 .

_B._ _Analysis of the network planning solutions_

Let assume that the SLA of the new tenant is translated to a
specification at the busy hour of _A_ _m_ ( _[t]_ _B_ )  100 Mbps. At this

initial stage, the new tenant’s spatial traffic demand distribution
is assumed to be unknown, so the planning is carried out using


configured for each SC to have _SINR_ _edge_  9 dB at


2 [ of the ]

_Fig. 4. Network deployment and estimated traffic demand using the detailed_
_planning specifications: (a) Based on uniform distribution at the SC-level,_
_(b) Based on correlated distribution at the SC-level,_ _(c) Based on uniform_
_distribution at the pixel-level, and (d) Based on correlated distribution at_
_the pixel-level._

the detailed planning specifications from the methods
explained in Section IV.A. Thus, the total traffic demand is
calculated as the actual traffic demand from existing tenants
plus the estimated new tenant’s demand. After generating the
detailed planning specifications, it is observed that in the
_capacity conformance monitoring_ module condition (14) is
satisfied for the three deployed SCs, so that the _capacity_
_dimensioning and planning_ module is launched.

Fig. 4(a-d) show the results of the planning process for
different sets of detailed planning specifications corresponding
to the methods of Section IV.A.

For the uniform distribution at the SC-level method, Fig.
4(a) shows that, given that SC 2 has the smallest service area,
the traffic demand per pixel in this SC is estimated to be
slightly higher than in SC 1 and 3. Then, the _capacity_
_dimensioning and planning_ module adds 6 new SCs, three of
which are located in the right upper corner of the scenario,
where the traffic density is higher.

The correlated distribution at the SC-level method is

represented in Fig. 4(b). This method estimates that SC 3,
which initially carried less traffic (i.e. 5.0 Mbps), is the cell that
receives proportionally less traffic from the new tenant.
Therefore, compared to the method of Fig. 4(a), additional SCs
such as SC 9 are not required in the service area of SC 3.
Instead, the number of channels allocated to SC 3 is increased
by one.

For the method based on uniform distribution at the pixellevel, illustrated in Fig. 4(c), the results are quite similar to the
first method since both methods approximate the uniform
distribution. The only difference is that SC 4 is placed a bit
more to the right.

The last method [see Fig. 4(d)], based on correlated
distribution at the pixel-level, produces the largest variations in
the traffic demand per pixel. Consequently, SCs 5 and 7 are
placed in, or close to, the area with high traffic density, so that
part of the traffic is offloaded from SC 1, having this cell three
channels allocated after the planning. Besides, unlike other


methods, additional SCs are not required in the service area of
SC 3 because a lower traffic density is assumed in this region.

_C._ _Analysis of the network operation with the new tenant_

This section evaluates the solutions of the planning
algorithm when the new tenant’s service is operative and the
actual traffic demand at the busy hour of the new tenant is
spatially distributed as illustrated in Fig. 5, where two cases are
distinguished. In the former [Fig. 5(a)], the new tenant’s spatial
traffic demand exhibits quite high correlation with already
existing tenants, whose spatial traffic distribution is represented
in Fig. 3. Specifically, using Pearson’s coefficient, both traffic
distributions are 90% correlated. In the latter case [Fig. 5(b)],
the distributions are only 15% correlated.

Let assume now that the network has been deployed as
dictated by the planning [i.e. with the real network layouts as
illustrated in Fig. 4(a-d)] and let consider the real traffic
demand of the new tenant shown in Fig. 5. In that case, Table
II shows the required bandwidth _[B]_ [%] _i_ ( ) _t_ [ and the cell bandwidth ]

_B_ in each SC considering the actual traffic demand for the two
levels of correlation with the different planning methods. The
last row in the table shows values aggregated over all the SCs.
The notation in the table is X/Y where X represents the
required bandwidth and Y the cell bandwidth. As a reference
for comparison with the methods discussed in Fig. 4, the table
also includes the result of the network planning taking as input
the real traffic of the new tenant (shown in Fig. 5). The
deployments for this case are shown in Fig. 6.

In general, the method that fits better the traffic demand (in
this case, the reference approach) will minimize the required
resources without generating a loss of traffic. However,
according to Table II, this does not necessarily mean a lower
value of total required bandwidth. For example, the methods
based on uniform distribution provide the lowest values;
however, this happens because these methods deploy a greater
number of SCs in the scenario, as reflected in Fig. 4(a) and (c).

Given the minimum number of deployed SCs (i.e. 8), the
reference case obtains the lowest value of total required
bandwidth. With respect to the methods based on correlated
distribution, the method with SC-level resolution results in a
lower total required bandwidth since its network layout is more
similar to the reference case, as previously stated. Regarding
the two methods based on uniform distribution, the results in
terms of required bandwidth are very close to each other
because of the similarity of their network layouts.

Another aspect from Table II (see numbers highlighted in
bold) is that the required bandwidth in some SCs exceeds (or
nearly exceeds) the cell bandwidth, meaning that some traffic

_Fig. 5. Traffic demand of the new tenant: (a) 90% correlated with network’s_
~~_traffic_~~ ~~_demand;_~~ ~~_(b)_~~ ~~_15%_~~ ~~_correlated_~~ ~~_with_~~ ~~_network’s_~~ ~~_traffic_~~ ~~_demand_~~ _._

_Fig. 6. Network deployment with real tenant’s traffic demand for: (a) 90%_
_correlated traffic; (b) 15% correlated traffic._

might be lost. These cases are more evident in the case of 15%
correlated traffic due to the poorer match between the network
layout and the spatial distribution of traffic demand. In the case
of 90% correlated traffic, only the methods based on correlated
distribution provide insufficient bandwidth or they are close to
it. However, this lack of bandwidth (about 1 MHz) is marginal
compared to the channel bandwidth. In addition, the
deployment has been carried out with only 8 SCs, so that the
cost of the solution is cheaper than other methods.









|Cor.<br>[%]|SC|REFERENCE<br>(ACTUAL<br>TRAFFIC<br>KNOWN)|UNIFORM<br>SC-LEVEL|CORR.<br>SC-LEVEL|UNIFORM<br>PX-LEVEL|CORR.<br>PX-LEVEL|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|90|1|30/60|32/40|30/40|29/40|38/60|
|90|2|18/40|23/40|28/40|19/40|14/20|
|90|3|43/60|25/40|48/60|24/40|53/60|
|90|4|28/60|23/60|23/60|32/60|24/40|
|90|5|35/60|17/40|29/40|19/40|41/40|
|90|6|16/40|24/40|22/40|22/40|37/60|
|90|7|36/40|36/40|39/40|36/40|28/40|
|90|8|9/20|10/20|10/20|10/20|8/20|
|90|9|--|10/40|--|10/40|--|
|90|tot|215/380|200/360|229/340|201/360|243/340|
|15|1|24/40|21/40|19/40|19/40|38/60|
|15|2|22/40|20/40|24/40|16/40|15/20|
|15|3|42/60|31/40|53/60|33/40|66/60|
|15|4|28/60|21/60|20/60|30/60|30/40|
|15|5|14/40|19/40|35/40|22/40|69/40|
|15|6|30/60|23/40|20/40|22/40|36/60|
|15|7|27/40|48/40|55/40|49/40|38/40|
|15|8|19/40|7/20|7/20|7/20|6/20|
|15|9|--|9/40|--|9/40|--|
|15|tot|206/380|199/360|233/340|207/360|298/340|


T ABLE II. A CTUAL R EQ . BW [MH Z ] AND C ELL BW [MH Z ] FOR 90 AND 15%

CORRELATED TRAFFIC

_D._ _Re-planning the new tenant during tenant’s operation_

Once the new tenant’s service is operative, condition (14) is
evaluated again to determine whether there exists a lack of
capacity or not. If so, the _capacity dimensioning and planning_
module is relaunched to provide a new network configuration.
In our experiment, this happens for the SCs whose statistics in
Table II are represented in bold.

For the methods based on uniform distribution, it is noted
that, in case of 90% correlated traffic, there is no lack of
capacity. However, in case of 15% correlated traffic, SC 7
satisfies condition (14) and therefore a new planning stage is
launched. As a result of the re-planning process, it is obtained
that the network layout is not modified, but SCs 4 and 7
increase the number of channels by one, while SC 9 decreases


it by one.

With respect to the methods based on correlated
distribution, Fig. 7 shows the network layout after the replanning process for 90% and 15% correlated traffic. As
observed, both the network layout and bandwidth assignment
have changed. In case of 90% correlated traffic [Fig. 7(a) and
(b)], a new SC (i.e. SC9) is deployed in the left upper side of
the scenario to relieve traffic from congested SCs. This new SC
also produces changes in the bandwidth assignment, which can
be observed by comparing the numbers in parentheses in Fig.
4(b) and (d) with those of Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively. In
total, there are three changes (i.e. adding or removing a
channel) in each case.

In case of 15% correlated traffic [Fig. 7(c) and (d)], a new
SC (i.e. SC9) is deployed in the center of the scenario, where
the traffic density is higher. With respect to the channel
assignment, the changes can be observed by comparing Fig.
4(b) and (d) with Fig. 7(c) and (d), respectively.

Table III shows a comparative analysis between the
network layouts before and after the re-planning process for
each analyzed method. For a high level of correlated traffic
(90%), the best methods (without considering the reference) are
the two based on correlated distribution, since they utilize the
lowest number of channels (i.e. 15 and 17), provided that the
number of deployed SCs is 9 for all methods. Note that these
two solutions are achieved through a two-step process that
comprises planning and re-planning (where an additional SC is
deployed). If the method employs pixel-level resolution, there
is also a bandwidth shortage (about 1 MHz), which might lead
to a small loss of traffic. For this reason, the method based on
correlated distribution at the SC-level is a better solution when
the new tenant’s traffic is not fully correlated with already
existing tenants.

For a low level of correlated traffic (15%), it is observed
that all the methods result in bandwidth shortage before the replanning stage, since the network layouts do not fit properly the
traffic demand. Such an effect is more pronounced for the
methods based on correlated distribution, especially when

_Fig. 7. Network deployment with real tenant’s traffic demand for: (a) 90%_
_correlated traffic, method based on correlated distribution at the SC-level;_
_(b) 90% correlated traffic, method based on correlated distribution at the_
_p_ ~~_i_~~ _xe_ ~~_l_~~ _-_ ~~_l_~~ _eve_ ~~_l_~~ _:_ ~~_(_~~ _c_ ~~_)_~~ ~~_15%_~~ _corre_ ~~_l_~~ _ate_ ~~_d_~~ _tra_ ~~_ffi_~~ _c, met_ ~~_h_~~ _o_ ~~_d_~~ ~~_b_~~ _ase_ ~~_d_~~ _on corre_ ~~_l_~~ _ate_ ~~_d_~~
_distribution at the SC-level; (d) 15% correlated traffic, method based on_
_correlated distribution at the pixel-level._

pixel-level resolution is used. In this latter case, because of the
bad traffic estimation, the number of channels assigned after
re-planning represents the worst case (i.e. 20). In case of the
SC-level resolution, there is a bandwidth shortage of 15 MHz.
However, this method eliminates the lack of bandwidth by
adding a new SC in an optimal location during the re-planning
phase, while the other methods that previously deployed more
SCs are unable to improve the solution.

It is clear that the pixel-level methods do not leverage the
higher spatial resolution when the traffic correlation is low, as
they have to employ the greatest number of channels. Thus, the
best methods (excluding the reference) in terms of minimum
number of channels are the two methods with SC-level
resolution. An important difference between them is the
amount of traffic that could be lost before the re-planning
stage. Thus, although one method requires less amount of
resources, it might lead to higher traffic losses.







|Cor.<br>[%]|Method|#SCs|Col4|#channels|Col6|Req. BW<br>[MHz]|Col8|BW<br>shortage<br>[MHz]|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Cor.<br>[%]|Method|Bef|Aft|Bef|Aft|Bef|Aft|Bef|Aft|
|90|REFERENCE|8|8|19|19|215|215|0|0|
|90|UNIFORM<br>SC-LEVEL|9|9|18|18|200|200|0|0|
|90|CORR.<br>SC-LEVEL|8|9|17|15|229|210|0|0|
|90|UNIFORM<br>PX-LEVEL|9|9|18|18|201|201|0|0|
|90|CORR.<br>PX-LEVEL|8|9|17|17|243|215|1|0|
|15|REFERENCE|8|8|19|19|206|206|0|0|
|15|UNIFORM<br>SC-LEVEL|9|9|18|17|199|205|8|0|
|15|CORR.<br>SC-LEVEL|8|9|17|16|233|215|15|0|
|15|UNIFORM<br>PX-LEVEL|9|9|18|18|207|198|9|0|
|15|CORR.<br>PX-LEVEL|8|9|17|20|298|228|35|0|


~~T~~ ~~ABLE~~ ~~III.~~ ~~N~~ ~~ETWORK~~ ~~DEPLOYMENT~~ ~~BEFORE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~AFTER~~ ~~RE~~ ~~-~~ ~~PLANNING~~

_E._ _Comparison with the state-of-the-art_

As explained in Section II, various approaches to solve the
RNP problem have been proposed in the literature. In this
paper, the selected approach, summarized in Algorithm 1, is
based on an iterative approach where a certain planning action
(such as deploying a new SC or adding a channel) is executed
at each step. Previous works based on iterative approach [2021] reduce the set of planning actions at each step to
determining the location of the SC ([20]) and, optionally, in
heterogeneous networks, selecting the optimal bandwidth
allocation with respect to the macrocell layer ([21]). However,
the problem of bandwidth allocation in the SC layer (i.e. with
respect other SCs) has not been addressed in those works.

Based on the above considerations, a state-of-the-art
(SOTA) method has been developed to compare the
performance with the proposed Algorithm 1. Specifically, the
SOTA method implements the iterative approach in [20-21].
Unlike Algorithm 1, this method only comprises the planning
action of deploying a new SC. Since the actions of adding or
removing a channel are not available during the planning
process, the number of allocated channels per SC must be
constant. Lastly, channel selection is performed according to
Algorithm 2.


The SOTA method has been evaluated under two distinct
contexts. One takes as input the real traffic of the new tenant in
the same way that Algorithm 1 was evaluated as a reference in
Section V.C (see Table II). The other combines Algorithm 1
with the best planning method of Section IV.A used to derive
the detailed planning specifications. According to the
evaluations in Section V.A-D, the best solution corresponds to
the method based on correlated distribution at the SC-level,
since it employed the least amount of network resources. The
study has been performed with two different values of the
number of channels per SC, i.e. 2 and 3 channels. This
constraint is only applied to the newly deployed SCs in the
scenario, because the SOTA method does not consider the
possibility of changing the number of allocated channels in
existing SCs. In addition, evaluations are carried out for the
two levels of traffic correlation (90 and 15%) used in previous
sections.

Table IV shows the required bandwidth and the cell
bandwidth in each SC for the SOTA method under the above
explained conditions (the notation is the same as in Table II).
The values in the table correspond to the situation when the
updated network is operative and carries actual traffic from the
new tenant. Compared to Algorithm 1 (see Table II), it is
observed that, in general, the number of SCs is larger with the
SOTA method. In addition, since the same (constant)
bandwidth is allocated for all the newly deployed SCs, the total
number of allocated channels is also larger. This highlights that
the possibility of changing the number of channels per SC (e.g.
by considering a larger set of possible planning actions to
choose from as in Algorithm 1) is much more effective than
limiting the cell bandwidth to a constant value and just
considering the addition of new SCs as in the SOTA method. A
closer look at Table IV reveals that, when three channels per
SC are allocated, the SOTA method based on correlated
distribution at the SC-level employs, as expected, a larger
amount of resources (10 SCs) than if the actual traffic is known
(8-9 SCs). However, when the cell bandwidth is limited to two
channels, the amount of resources in both cases is the same (10
SCs). In turn, the method proposed in this paper is able to
support the traffic with only 8 SCs (see Table II), thus
outperforming the SOTA method with both 2 and 3 channels.

VI. C ONCLUSION

In this paper, the cell planning problem for small cell multitenant networks has been studied. From the perspective of
infrastructure providers, the automation of procedures is a key
consideration due to the complexity of managing diverse
tenants’ capacity requirements. In the proposed scheme, these
requirements are translated into a set of detailed planning
specifications over the spatial/temporal domains. Then, the
planning process is modeled following a SON approach, where
a condition to detect capacity issues is periodically checked in
order to trigger particular planning actions, such as
adding/removing a channel or deploying/relocating a SC.

The proposed framework has been evaluated in a scenario
in which a new tenant is added in the network. To derive the

set of planning specifications of the new tenant, different
methods are considered depending on the expected correlation
with the actual traffic demand in the network and the spatial
resolution of the traffic measurements. The evaluation has been

carried out for two different traffic correlation levels. Results
show that the detailed planning specifications based on
correlated distribution with a spatial resolution at the SC-level
employ the least amount of network resources. This is because
the differences between the estimated and actual traffic demand

make the use of higher spatial resolutions less effective. The
specifications based on uniform distribution require a larger
amount of resources to meet the traffic demand even if the new
tenant’s traffic and network’s traffic are poorly correlated. In
addition, the proposed capacity and dimensioning scheme
(Algorithm 1) has been compared with existing planning
solutions, which do not consider the spectrum planning in the
SC-layer. Results show that the existing solutions require a
larger number of deployed SCs for serving the same traffic
than the proposed approach.








|Cor.<br>[%]|SC|SOTA-2CH<br>(ACTUAL<br>TRAFFIC<br>KNOWN)|SOTA-3CH<br>(ACTUAL<br>TRAFFIC<br>KNOWN)|SOTA-2CH<br>+ CORR.<br>SC-LEVEL|SOTA-3CH<br>+ CORR.<br>SC-LEVEL|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|90|1|27/40|30/40|20/40|23/40|
|90|2|13/40|22/40|26/40|24/40|
|90|3|20/40|22/40|12/40|14/40|
|90|4|16/40|16/60|19/40|16/60|
|90|5|45/40|34/60|23/40|17/60|
|90|6|28/40|22/60|25/40|18/60|
|90|7|9/40|22/60|33/40|27/60|
|90|8|8/40|14/60|8/40|6/60|
|90|9|8/40|16/60|8/40|9/60|
|90|10|19/40|--|10/40|8/60|
|90|tot|193/400|198/480|184/400|162/540|
|15|1|22/40|31/40|13/40|15/40|
|15|2|8/40|38/40|23/40|20/40|
|15|3|23/40|25/40|17/40|19/40|
|15|4|31/40|40/60|15/40|13/60|
|15|5|45/40|22/60|26/40|20/60|
|15|6|17/40|35/60|24/40|17/60|
|15|7|7/40|16/60|44/40|35/60|
|15|8|8/40|8/60|6/40|4/60|
|15|9|14/40|--|10/40|12/60|
|15|10|12/40|--|10/40|8/60|
|15|tot|187/400|215/420|188/400|163/540|


T ABLE IV. A CTUAL R EQ . BW [MHZ] AND C ELL BW [MH Z ] FOR SOTA

~~M~~ ETHOD

As future work, it is planned to further analyze the
proposed planning methodology for ongoing tenants whose
traffic demand varies significantly over time. In particular,
when the traffic demand of a certain tenant decreases, planning
actions such as channel releases and SC relocations become
effective solutions to minimize capacity over-provisioning in
the network. In addition, more sophisticated combinatory
optimization will be investigated for solving the problem.

R EFERENCES

[1] Small Cell Forum, “Capacity planning for HetNets,” Document
174.07.01, January 2016.

[2] I. Hwang, B. Song and S. S. Soliman, "A holistic view on hyper-dense
heterogeneous and small cell networks," in _IEEE Communications_
_Magazine_, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 20-27, June 2013.

[3] S. Chen, Xiang Ji, C. Xing, Z. Fei and Hualei Wang, "System-level
performance evaluation of ultra-dense networks for 5G," TENCON
2015 - 2015 IEEE Region 10 Conference, pp. 1-4, 2015.

[4] P. C. Garces, X. C. Perez, K. Samdanis and A. Banchs, "RMSC: A Cell
Slicing Controller for Virtualized Multi-Tenant Mobile Networks," in
Proc. of _IEEE 81st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring)_, pp.
1-6, May 2015.



[5] G. Tseliou, F. Adelantado, C.V. Verikoukis, “Scalable RAN
Virtualization in Multi-Tenant LTE-A Heterogeneous Networks
(Extended version),” in _CoRR abs/1506.03929_, August 2015.

[6] 5G-PPP, “5G empowering vertical industries,” White Paper, February
2016.

[7] 3GPP, “Self-Organizing Networks (SON); Concepts and requirements,
version 13.0.0,” TS 32.500, January 2016.

[8] J. Ramiro, K. Hamied, _Self-Organizing Networks. Self-planning, self-_
_optimization and self-healing for GSM, UMTS and LTE_, John Wiley &
Sons, 2012.

[9] NGMN Alliance, “NGMN Use Cases related to Self Organising
Network, Overall Description”, May, 2007.

[10] U. Challita, Z. Dawy, G. Turkiyyah, J. Naoum-Sawaya, “A chance

constrained approach for LTE cellular network planning under
uncertainty,” in _Computer Communications_, vol. 73, Part A, pp. 34-45,
January 2016.

[11] H. Ghazzai, E. Yaacoub, M. S. Alouini, Z. Dawy and A. Abu-Dayya,

"Optimized LTE Cell Planning With Varying Spatial and Temporal
User Densities," in _IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology_, vol.
65, no. 3, pp. 1575-1589, March 2016.

[12] E. Yaacoub and Z. Dawy, "LTE radio network planning with HetNets:

BS placement optimization using simulated annealing," in Proc. of 17th
IEEE Mediterranean Electrotechnical Conference (MELECON 2014),
pp. 327-333, April 2014.

[13] X. Liang, H. Liu and Q. Wang, "4G Heterogeneous Networks Base

Station Planning Using Evolutionary Multi-objective Algorithm," in
Proc. of _11th International Conference on Computational Intelligence_
_and Security (CIS)_, pp. 248-252, December 2015.

[14] S. Wang, W. Zhao and C. Wang, "Budgeted Cell Planning for Cellular

Networks With Small Cells," in _IEEE Transactions on Vehicular_
_Technology_, vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4797-4806, Oct. 2015.

[15] S. A. Banani, A. W. Eckford and R. S. Adve, "Required number of

small-cells in heterogenous networks with non-uniform traffic
distribution," in Proc. of _48th Annual Conference on Information_
_Sciences and Systems (CISS)_, pp. 1-6, March 2014.

[16] W. El-Beaino, A. M. El-Hajj and Z. Dawy, "On Radio network planning

for next generation 5G networks: A case study," in Proc. of
_International Conference on Communications, Signal Processing, and_
_their Applications (ICCSPA)_, pp. 1-6, February 2015.

[17] F. h. Tseng, L. d. Chou, H. c. Chao and J. Wang, "Ultra-dense small cell

planning using cognitive radio network toward 5G," in _IEEE Wireless_
_Communications_, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 76-83, December 2015.

[18] C. Ran, S. Wang, C. Wang, “Cellular networks planning: A workload

balancing perspective”, in _Computer Networks_, vol. 84, pp. 64-75, June
2015.

[19] H. K. Rath, K.N.R.S.V. Prasad, V. Revoori and A. Simha, "A joint

local-global technique for wireless mobile network planning and
optimization," in Proc. of _IEEE 24th Annual International Symposium_
_on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC)_, pp.
3089-3094, September 2013.

[20] K. Son, E. Oh, B. Krishnamachari, “Energy-efficient design of

heterogeneous cellular networks from deployment to operation,” in
_Computer Networks_, vol. 78, pp. 95-106, February 2015.

[21] H. Ren, M. Zhao, W. Zhou, P. Dong and J. Kong, "Traffic-Aware Micro

Base Station Planning in Wireless Cellular Networks," in Proc. of _IEEE_
_78th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Fall)_, pp. 1-5, September
2013.

[22] X. Gelabert, P. Legg and C. Qvarfordt, "Small Cell densification

requirements in high capacity future cellular networks," in Proc. of
_IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC)_,
pp. 1112-1116, June 2013.

[23] L. Zhou, Z. Sheng, L. Wei, X. Hu, H. Zhao, J. Wei, V.C.M. Leung,

“Green cell planning and deployment for small cell networks in smart
cities,” in _Ad Hoc Networks_, vol. 43, pp. 30-42, June 2016.

[24] U. Challita, L. Al-Kanj and Z. Dawy, "On LTE cellular network

planning under demand uncertainty," in Proc. of _IEEE Wireless_
_Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)_, pp. 2079-2084,
April 2014.

[25] H. El Sawy, E. Hossain, and M. Haenggi, “Stochastic geometry for

modeling, analysis, and design of multi-tier and cognitive cellular
wireless networks: A survey,” in _IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts._, vol. 15,
no. 3, pp. 996–1019, June 2013.

[26] X. Li, X. Zhang and W. Wang, "An energy-efficient cell planning

strategy for heterogeneous network based on realistic traffic data," in
Proc. of _International Conference on Computing, Management and_
_Telecommunications (ComManTel)_, pp. 122-127, April 2014.

[27] S. Boiardi, A. Capone, B. Sansó, “Radio planning of energy-aware

cellular networks,” in _Computer Networks_, vol. 57, no. 13, pp. 25642577, September 2013.

[28] P. Di Francesco, F. Malandrino, T. K. Forde and L. A. DaSilva, "A

Sharing- and Competition-Aware Framework for Cellular Network
Evolution Planning," in IEEE Transactions on Cognitive
Communications and Networking, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 230-243, June 2015.

[29] P. Rost _et al_ ., "Network Slicing to Enable Scalability and Flexibility in

5G Mobile Networks," in _IEEE Communications Magazine_, vol. 55, no.
5, pp. 72-79, May 2017.

[30] X. Foukas, G. Patounas, A. Elmokashfi and M. K. Marina, "Network

Slicing in 5G: Survey and Challenges," in _IEEE Communications_
_Magazine_, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 94-100, May 2017.

[31] A. Ksentini and N. Nikaein, "Toward Enforcing Network Slicing on

RAN: Flexibility and Resources Abstraction," in _IEEE Communications_
_Magazine_, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 102-108, 2017.

[32] K. Samdanis, X. Costa-Perez and V. Sciancalepore, "From network

sharing to multi-tenancy: The 5G network slice broker," in _IEEE_
_Communications Magazine_, vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 32-39, July 2016.

[33] P. Caballero, A. Banchs, G. de Veciana and X. Costa-Pérez, "Multi
Tenant Radio Access Network Slicing: Statistical Multiplexing of
Spatial Loads," in _IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking_, vol. 25, no.
5, pp. 3044-3058, Oct. 2017.

[34] O. Narmanlioglu and E. Zeydan, "New era in shared C-RAN and core

network: A case study for efficient RRH usage," in Proc. of _IEEE_
_International Conference on Communications (ICC)_, pp. 1-7, May,
2017.

[35] P. Muñoz, O. Sallent and J. Pérez-Romero, "Capacity Self-Planning in

Small Cell Multi-Tenant 5G Networks," in Proc. of _2nd IFIP/IEEE_
_International Workshop on Management of 5G Networks (5GMan_
_2017)_, May 2017.

[36] D. López-Pérez, M. Ding, H. Claussen and A. H. Jafari, "Towards 1

Gbps/UE in Cellular Systems: Understanding Ultra-Dense Small Cell
Deployments," in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 2078-2101, Fourthquarter 2015.

[37] 3GPP TS 32.101 “Telecommunication management; Principles and high

level requirements (Release 12)”, September, 2014.

[38] I. Siomina and D. Yuan, “Analysis of cell load coupling for LTE

network planning and optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 2287–2297, 2012.

[39] 3GPP. “Radio Frequency (RF) system scenarios”, version 12.0.0 (2014
09). TR 36.942.

[40] 3GPP. “Further advancements for E-UTRA physical layer aspects”,

version 9.0.0 (2010-03). TR 36.814.

**Pablo Muñoz** received his M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in telecommunication engineering from the
University of Málaga in 2008 and 2013,
respectively. From 2009 to 2013, he was a Ph.D.
fellow in self-optimization of mobile radio access
networks. Upon completing his Ph.D, he worked as
a research assistant within an R&D contract with
Optimi-Ericsson. Since 2016 he is the recipient of a
Spanish competitive grant (Juan de la Cierva) at the
Polytechnic University of Catalonia.

**[View publication stats](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322515352)**


**Oriol Sallent** is a Professor at the Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) in Barcelona. He
has participated in a wide range of european and
national projects, with diverse responsibilities as
Principal Investigator, Coordinator and
Workpackage Leader. He regularly serves as a
consultant for a number of private companies. He
has been involved in the organization of many
different scientific activities, such as Conferences,
Workshops, Special Issues in renowed international
journals, etc. He has contributed to standardisation
bodies such as 3GPP, IEEE and ETSI.
He is co-author of 13 books and has published 200+ papers, mostly in highimpact IEEE journals and renowed international conferences. His research
interests include 5G RAN (Radio Access Network) planning and
management, artificial intelligence-based radio resource management,
virtualisation of wireless networks, cognitive management in cognitive radio
networks and dynamic spectrum access and management among others.

**Jordi Pérez-Romero** (S’98–M’04) is associate
professor at the Dept. of Signal Theory and
Communications of the Universitat Politècnica de

Catalunya (UPC) in Barcelona, Spain. He received
the Telecommunications Engineering degree and
the PhD from the same university in 1997 and
2001, respectively. His research interests are in the
field of mobile communication systems with a
main focus of 5G, covering radio resource and
QoS management, self-organizing networks,
network slicing, multi-tenancy and application of
data analytics and artificial intelligence tools in the
management of 5G networks. He has been involved in different European
Projects as well as in projects for private companies. He has published more
than 200 papers in international journals and conferences and has co-authored
two books on mobile communications. He is associate editor of IEEE

Vehicular Technology Magazine and Eurasip Journal on Wireless
Communications Networks.

